The Effects of Latency on a Progressive Second-Price
Auction
Jordana Blazek, Eric Olson, Fredrick C. Harris, Jr.
University of Nevada, Reno
Abstract. The progressive second-price auction of Lazar and Semret is a decen-
tralized mechanism for the allocation and real-time pricing of a divisible resource.
Our focus is on how delays in the receipt of bid messages, asynchronous analysis
by buyers of the market and randomness in the initial bids affect the ε-Nash
equilibria obtained by the method of truthful ε-best reply. We introduce an algo-
rithm for finding minimal-revenue equilibrium states and then show that setting
a reserve price just below clearing stabilizes seller revenue while maintaining ef-
ficiency. Utility is of primary interest given the assumption of elastic demand.
Although some buyers experienced unpredictability in the value and cost of their
individual allocations, their respective utilities were predictable.
1
Introduction
Lazar and Semret [8] introduced a decentralized second-price auction for allo-
cation of network bandwidth in which buyers asynchronously update bid prices
in a way that maximizes their allocations while increasing their utility, see also
Semret, Liao, Campbell and Lazar [12]. The novelty in this auction mechanism is
a buyer’s individual price valuation is revealed only locally when that same buyer
updates their bid with a new quantity and corresponding marginal value. Thus,
the seller does not need the full price valuation curve of each buyer to allocate
the resource in a way that maximizes the welfare or total value in the auction.
This progressive second-price auction was extended to the case where prices
were quantized by Jia and Caines in [7]. An opt-out selection method in the
presence of multiple sellers was considered in [4]. For markets consisting of many
simultaneous auctions a graph theoretic framework that characterizes influences
resulting from which buyers buy from which sellers in terms of a bipartite graph
is further explored in [5].
It is known provided ε is large enough that Algorithm 1 in [8] leads to bid
updates that converge to an ε-Nash equilibium—an equilibrium state where no
buyer can individually increase individual their utility by more that ε through
changing their bid. We call this the method of truthful ε-best reply. Proposition 3
in [8] shows at such an equilibrium the auction is efficient, that is, the total value
in the final allocation is within O(√εκ) of optimal. Here κ is a constant related
to the maximal rate of diminishing returns among all buyers in the auction.
Consider three possible sources of randomness: the initial bids of each buyer,
the asynchronous order in which buyers update their bids and communication
latency in the receipt of bid messages. Perceptions of fairness are influenced
by predictability of outcomes; however, it is possible that randomness in the
initialization and operation of the auction do not lead to significantly different
arXiv:2511.17424v1  [cs.GT]  21 Nov 2025

2
Jordana Blazek, Eric Olson, Fredrick C. Harris, Jr.
equilibrium states. Our focus is on the degree the above sources of randomness
influence both market aggregates and individual outcomes.
Second-price auctions, pioneered by Vickrey [13], allow the highest bidder to
pay the second-highest bid, incentivizing truthful bidding, as paying the second-
highest price minimizes the need for strategic manipulation. This auction type
supports fair pricing but faces challenges in dynamic and decentralized environ-
ments where information and timing constraints can hinder optimal bidding, see
Brandt and Sandholm [3] and Maillé [10].
While aggregate quantities such as total value, utility and revenue are of
interest to the seller, an individual buyer is more concerned about their individual
costs, value and utility. Assuming the buyers do not change, then it is desirable
that the allocation of resource between them also not change. Our goal is to
characterize the expected outcomes and deviations in those outcomes for both the
seller and individual buyers that arise from the distributed asynchronous nature
of the progressive second-price auction under a realistic model of communication
latency as described by Arfeen, Pawlikowski, McNickle and Willig [1], see also
Arshadi and Jahangir [2].
We begin our study by introducing an algorithm to construct ε-Nash equi-
libria consisting of truthful bids in which each buyer receives the exact quantity
requested and consequently impose no externality on the other buyers in the auc-
tion. As a result the second price for each buyer is zero and the revenue received
by the seller also zero. Note that the existence of zero-revenue ε-Nash equilibria
may be inferred from Semret [11] who observed that a buyer can obtain resource
at zero cost by making a bid with a zero per-unit price valuation. On the other
hand there are also ε-Nash equilibria which generate revenue much closer to the
total value in the auction. Therefore, total revenue can vary significantly between
different ε-Nash equilibria of the same auction. Since total utility is total value
minus total cost, it follows that the total utility enjoyed by the buyers can also
vary significantly between different equilibrium states. Note that Delenda, Maillé
and Tuffin [9] balance revenue maximization with efficiency using an optimized
seller reserve price determined by simple numerical methods.
After setting the reserve price below the clearing price to reduce the variabil-
ity in revenue outcome for the seller without affecting auction efficiency, we then
proceed to characterize the effects of latency and asynchronous bidding in the
progressive second-price auction. Simulations indicate that the method of truth-
ful ε-best reply continues to converge even with high communications latencies.
Moreover, at the resulting equilibrium states, although some buyers experience
large deviations in the value and cost of their respective allocations, the devia-
tions in their utilities are small. Given the assumption of elastic demand, utility
is of primary importance and we find it remarkable how predictable this outcome
was when significant variability was present in the operation of the auction.
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section 2 introduces the formal setup,
notation and buyer–seller valuation framework. Section 3 analyzes zero-revenue
equilibria, showing how truthful ε-best replies alternated with compromise replies
can lead to efficient but unprofitable outcomes, motivating the use of a reserve
price. Section 4 examines the role of communication latency and asynchronicity

The Effects of Latency on a Progressive Second-Price Auction
3
on equilibrium convergence and variability through stochastic modeling. Section 5
details an experiment consisting of many pairs of identical twins in which one
twin is lazy and evaluates the market more slower and sends their bids with much
greater latency. Finally, Section 6 concludes with implications for decentralized
market design and directions for future research.
2
Preliminaries
Consider a progressive second-price auction consisting of one seller and multi-
ple buyers. During the operation of the auction buyers place their bids asyn-
chronously and decentralization leads to communication latency in the receipt
of bid messages. Thus, the outcome of the auction is affected by randomness in
the communication delays and bid ordering. We also study what effect the initial
bids have on the outcome of the auction.
Suppose a quantity Q of a divisible resource is to be allocated among a fixed
set of buyers. Let I be an index set such that i ∈I represents a buyer able to
participate in the auction. Each buyer has a price valuation θi(q) which identifies
the value that buyer obtains upon receipt of a quantity q of resource. We suppose
the valuation increases in q up to a maximum quantity ¯qi and is concave to reflect
diminishing returns. Assuming θi is differentiable, it follows that θ′
i is decreasing
and the greatest marginal value buyer i ever places on the resource is given by
¯pi = θ′
i(0).
Intuitively, θ′
i(q) represents the value of the next unit of resource after q units
have been obtained. Take θi as in [8] to be quadratic of the form
θi(z) =
(
(1 −1
2z/¯qi)z¯pi
for z < ¯qi
1
2 ¯qi¯pi
otherwise.
(1)
where buyer demand ¯qi is sampled uniformly over [50, 100] and the maximal
marginal valuation ¯pi is uniform on [10, 20]. Note that the resulting decrease in
marginal value is bounded uniformly in i both above and below. Unless otherwise
mentioned we consider 100 buyers that participate in the auction and keep their
respective price valuations θi fixed as well as the amount of resource Q = 1000
available in the auction.
Remark 1. Since ¯qi ≥50 for each buyer, the total quantity of resource valued by
100 buyers is at least 5000. Therefore Q = 1000 is guaranteed to be a condition
of scarcity in which at least one buyer has the potential to increase the value of
their allocation.
Now consider the bids (qi, pi) ∈[0, ¯qi] × [0, ∞) from all buyers i ∈I able to
participate in the auction. Here qi is the quantity requested and pi the amount
the buyer would be willing to spend to obtain an additional unit of resource, that
is, the marginal value at qi. Thus, a truthful bid always satisfies pi = θi(qi). We
emphasize that the full valuation curve θi for each buyer is not made available to
the seller but revealed only locally though the marginal value pi at the quantity
qi being bid on.

4
Jordana Blazek, Eric Olson, Fredrick C. Harris, Jr.
Denote the bid (qi, pi) submitted by buyer i as (i, qi, pi). Then the set of all
bids in the auction is s =

(i, qi, pi) : i ∈I
	
. We let the bid (0, Q, P) represent
the reserve price set by the seller, never update this bid and suppose 0 ∈I. In
this special case θ0(a) = Pz is linear and θ′
0(z) = P constant. For convenience
denote I0 = I \ {0}.
If k ̸= i then buyer k is in competition with buyer i and the opposing bids
against which buyer i must bid are s−i =

(k, qk, pk) ∈s : k ̸= i
	
.
At a marginal price of y the resource available to buyer i is
Qi(y, s−i) = max{Q −z, 0}
(2)
where z = P 
qk : (k, qk, pk) ∈s−i and pk > y
	
. Note that if y < P the
reserve price takes effect, the bid (0, Q, P) implies q0 = Q is an addend in z and
consequently Qi(y, s−i) = 0.
Conversely, obtaining at least a quantity z of resource from the auction re-
quires a bid with marginal price
Pi(z, s−i) = inf

y ≥0 : Qi(y, s−i) ≥z }.
(3)
Practically speaking, the progressive second-price auction aims for an ε-Nash
equilibrium in which an individual buyer’s utility can not be increased by more
than ε. At such equilibria bid prices receving a positive allocation of resource will
be close but not in general the same. Note, however, that if prices are quantized—
for example in dollars and cents—then ties become more likely, especially when
ε is small. For the simulations in this paper we do not quantize prices and take
ε = 5 throughout. Even so, a tie breaking condition appears useful. Following Jia
and Caines [7] we allocate bids whose prices are tied proportionally.
Thus, the allocation to buyer i is
ai(s) = (qi/z) min

qi, Qi(pi, s−i)
	
(4)
where z = 1 if qi = 0 and otherwise
z = P 
qk : (k, qk, pk) ∈s and pk = pi
	
.
Since the cost ci(s) to buyer i for participating in a second-price auction is
the loss incurred by the other buyers due to that participation, changes in the
allocations can be used to compute costs. In particular,
ci(s) =
X
k∈I\{i}
pk
 ak(s−i) −ak(s)

.
(5)
Remark 2. As our second-price auction is progressive, the bids s−i reflect the his-
torical influence of buyer i leading up to the present time. Thus, ci(s) represents
the externality obtained by omitting buyer i when determining the allocation and
not the true externality that would have resulted if buyer i were never part of the
auction. This difference between the true and instantaneous externality appears
central to the zero revenue ε-Nash equilibrium in the next section.

The Effects of Latency on a Progressive Second-Price Auction
5
Unlike [8], [7] and [4] we do not consider each buyer to be further constrained
by a budget bi that bounds the cost they are willing to incur for their resource
allocation. This is for simplicity and to avoid situations where the second price
changes in such a way that a previous bid needs to be updated to stay under
budget.
Crucial to the progressive second price auction is the maximum allocation
available in a market on the price valuation curve of buyer i. Again following [8]
we consider the bid update rule given by
Definition 1. The truthful ε-best reply is defined as follows. Let
Gi(s−i) =

z ∈[0, ¯qi] : z ≤Qi(θ′
i(z), s−i)
	
.
(6)
The ε-best reply to the bids s−i is defined as
(vi, θ′
i(vi))
where
vi = sup Gi(s−i) −ε/θ′
i(0).
The above bid is truthful since it lies on the graph of the marginal value.
Taking vi slightly less than the supremum ensures vi ∈Gi(s−i) and increases the
bid price θ′
i(vi) due to decreasing marginal value (except in the case i = 0). The
term ε/θ′
i(0) ensures the bid (vi, θ′
i(vi)) is within ε of the best bid. In other words,
the truthfull ε-best reply of Definition 1 provides a truthful bid that cannot be
improved by more than ε while holding the opposing bids constant.
3
Zero-Revenue Equilibria
Before studying how communication latency and asychronous bidding affect the
outcomes of the progressive second-price auction, we first address variations in
outcomes that result from Remark 2 on the computation of cost. This section
examines zero-revenue equilibria. It demonstrates how such equilibria emerge
under the standard mechanism and explains why a reserve price is required to
ensure positive seller revenue.
To construct zero-revenue equilibria we modify the method of truthful ε-
best reply given as Algorithm 1 in [8] to alternate between the original bidding
strategy and a compromise bid. Simulations indicate this modified algorithm still
converges to an ε-Nash equilibrium, but in this case one in which each buyer
obtains the exact allocation they asked for.
While the ε-best reply chooses a near optimal bid without regard for a buyers
previous bid, a compromise bid is based on the requested and and allocated
resource from the previous bid. Namely, we have
Definition 2. Suppose the bid (qi, pi) from buyer i receives an allocation of ai(s).
The truthful compromise reply is defined as
(vi, θ′
i(vi))
where
vi = (ai(s) + qi)/2.
While compromise bids generally do not lead to an ε-Nash equilibrium on their
own, interesting behavior happens when bids are alternated between the ε-best

6
Jordana Blazek, Eric Olson, Fredrick C. Harris, Jr.
reply of Definition 1 and the compromise reply of Definition 2. The compromise
bids reduce the externality while the ε-best replies advance towards an ε-Nash
equilibrium.
First recall the method of truthful ε-best reply from [11] as
Algorithm 1. The method of truthful ε-best reply is
1. Each buyer evaluates the ε-best reply (Definition 1) and updates bids when
utility increases by at least ε.
2. Repeat until no additional ε-best replies occur.
Remark 3. At first it seems plausible that only a subset of ε-Nash equilibria might
be obtained through the method of truthful ε-best reply and that the zero-revenue
case might not be among them. However, if the initial bids start at a particular
equilibrium state, then the ε-best reply will remain at that equilibrium. Thus, the
method of ε-best reply can terminate at any equilibrium state simply by starting
at that equilibrium.
Remark 4. The ε-best reply for buyer i is constructed so their allocation ai(s) =
qi; however, increasing the utility of buyer i will generally cause some of the
opposing buyers to lose their part of their allocations. Thus, after an ε-best reply
there may be j ̸= i such that aj(s) < qj. This reflects an externality imposed on
buyer j. If buyer j makes a compromise bid in reply, this reduces the externality
imposed by buyer i on buyer j while at the same time not reducing the allocation
of buyer j. In particular, switching between ε-best and compromise bids tends
to an ε-Nash equilibrium in which no other buyer imposes any externality on
another buyer.
Our modified algorithm may now be stated as
Algorithm 2. The alternating ε-best with compromise bid method is
1. Each buyer evaluates the ε-best reply (Definition 1) and updates bids when
utility increases by at least ε.
2. Each buyer submits a compromise bid (Definition 2) independent of immediate
utility gain.
3. Repeat until changes in compromise bids fall below tolerance and no additional
ε-best replies occur.
Note that compromise bids are made whether or not they increase utility. We
do not comment on the rationality of this method of bidding but instead view
Algorithm 2 as a technique to obtain zero-revenue ε-Nash equilibria. In turn such
equilibria demonstrate the need for a reserve price even though the allocations
are near value maximizing.
To demonstrate the convergence of the alternating ε-best with compromise bid
method to a zero-revenue ε-Nash equilibria, consider a simplified version of the
progressive second-price auction with no communication latency or asynchronous
bidding. In this case buyers bid round-robin and alternate between bid strategies.

The Effects of Latency on a Progressive Second-Price Auction
7
The only source of randomness comes from the initial bids. We illustrate the
effects of the reserve price by choosing different values of P ranging from 0 to 16.
Given an equilibrium state s obtained from Algorithm 2 we are interested in
the aggregate quantities of revenue, total value and total utility. These are given,
respectively, by
S[c] =
X
i∈I0
ci(s),
S[v] =
X
i∈I0
θi(ai(s))
and
S[u] = S[v] −S[c].
To further understand the effects of the reserve price, we also compute an average
bid price as
E[p] =
1
S[a]
X
i∈I0
ai(s)pi
where
S[a] =
X
i∈I0
ai(s).
Study how the above aggregate quantities depend on the initial bids by av-
eraging them over the ε-Nash equilibira corresponding to an ensemble of 100
randomly chosen initial bids. Specifically, consider a random set of initial bids
of the form { (i, qi, θ′
i(qi)) : i ∈I } where the qi are independent and uniformly
distributed over [0, ¯qi] for i ̸= 0 and q0 = Q. Let Ωbe the underlying uniform
sample space. Given ω ∈Ωdefine sw to be the ε-Nash equilibrium obtained from
Algorithm 2 starting at the initial bid corresponding to ω.
Now let E ⊆Ωbe an ensemble of 100 independent realizations of the initial
bids. Suppose X is either revenue, total value, total utility or bid price. The
ensemble average and sample variance of X is given by
⟨X⟩= 1
|E|
X
ω∈E
Xw
and
V [⟨X⟩] =
1
|E| −1
X
ω∈E
 Xw −⟨X⟩
2.
(7)
Here Xw indicates X measured at the ε-Nash equilibrium given by sw. For ex-
ample, if X = S[c] then the ensemble-averaged revenue would be
⟨S[c]⟩= 1
|E|
X
ω∈E
X
i∈I0
ci(sw).
Table 1. The effects of reserve price on the bid price, total value, util-
ity and revenue in the ε-Nash equilibria obtained from Algorithm 2
averaged over 100 different random initial bids. Except for the rev-
enue corresponding to a zero reserve price, the standard deviations—not
shown—were less than 1 percent of the averages.
Reserve Price
0
6
12
14
16
Bid Price
13.4024
13.4022
13.3745
14.124
16.1289
Total Value
15544.5
15544.6
15536.8
12623.1
5784.98
Total Utility
15544.5
9544.56
3536.76
1602.27
441.175
Total Revenue
10−13
6000
12000
11020.8
5343.8
Table 1 reports ensemble averages obtained through simulation of Algorithm 2
over an ensemble of 100 different initial bids. The standard deviations V [⟨X⟩]1/2

8
Jordana Blazek, Eric Olson, Fredrick C. Harris, Jr.
were consistently less than 1 percent of the average except for the zero-revenue
case corresponding to the reserve price of P = 0 where both the average and
deviation were numerically equal to zero. Note that for P ≤12 the total revenue
is equal to QP but when P ≥14 the total revenue decreases. This is because as
that point the seller starts buying back the resource which does not contribute
to revenue.
Remark 5. Since θ′
i(z) is decreasing, it is invertible. Define
fi(y) =
(
(θ′
i)−1(y)
for y ∈[0, ¯pi]
0
otherwise.
If the reserve price P is such that P
i∈I0 fi(P) < Q then seller buyback is guar-
anteed. A fundamental premise of the progressive second-price auction is that
the seller does not know the full valuation of each buyer; therefore, we do not
explore this condition further in this paper.
Given w ∈Ωobserve that the revenue-minimizing equilibrium sw is contained
in a neighborhood of truthful bids which are nearly revenue minimizing and also
ε-Nash equilibria. It follows that if the initial bids are chosen randomly, then there
is a positive probability that those bids are already at an ε-Nash equilibium that
is nearly revenue minimizing.
4
Latency and Asynchronicity
This section focuses on the variability caused by asynchronous bidding and com-
munication latency on the outcomes of the ε-Nash equilibrium states reached
using Algorithm 1 the method of truthful ε-best reply. Set P = 12 near the
largest value such that all resource is allocated. This maintains efficiency while
reducing the variability in revenue between equilibrium states. Also fix the initial
bids made by the buyers.
We use a renewal processes to model both communication latency and asyn-
chronicity in bid updates. Namely, we employ a sequence of independent Weibull-
distributed random variables with probability density
pdf(x) = β
λ
x
λ
β−1
e−(x/λ)β
where β is the shape and λ the scale. The parameter β characterizes the delay
regime: β < 1 corresponds to a heavy-tailed, light-traffic latency distribution
(bursty communication), whereas β > 1 represents a controlled, scheduled up-
date process with more predictable timing. Inspired by [1] and [2] we model the
interarrival times of bid messages using λc = 1.0 and βc = 0.75 with a transla-
tion of δc = 0.1 seconds. The decreasing hazard rate represents a bid sent under
conditions of light traffic where most messages arrive with minimum latency but
when lost experience exponential backoff of retransmission times.
As the auction progresses the ε-best reply is evaluated by each buyer over
intervals characterized by a Weibull distribution with λe = 0.25 and βe = 1.5

The Effects of Latency on a Progressive Second-Price Auction
9
Fig. 1. Comparison of the probability density functions governing the
time between evaluation of bids and the communication latency to
transmit a bid to the auction.
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
time between analyses
communication latency
density
seconds
translated by δe = 1.0 seconds. The increasing hazard rate represents a controlled
scheduling of market analysis that, in part, results from the assumption that each
bid incurs a cost of ε that needs to be amortized before making the next bid.
Remark 6. For each fixed buyer the intervals between market analyses follow a
Weibull distribution; however, actually sending a message to update a bid is only
performed when the utility can be increased by at least ε. Moreover, as the state
of the auction gets closer to an equilibrium, the rate at which ε-best replies lead
to a bid update appears to slow down.
Let ∆c
i represent the communication delay (time from bid placement to ac-
tivation) and ∆e
i be the evaluation interarrival delay (time between attempted
rebids). These random variables are independent and distributed according to
∆c
i ∼δc + Weibull(λc, βc)
and
∆e
i ∼δe + Weibull(λe, βe).
Thus, a bid (qi, pi) computed at time t is observed at time t + ∆c
i. Similarly, a
buyer who analyzes the current state of the market at time t will again compute
their ε-best reply at time t+∆e
i. The simulation operates as a discrete-time event
system. Events are scheduled and processed in a priority queue, advancing the
simulation clock t to the next event.
Figure 1 depicts the distributions of the time between bids and the commu-
nication latency. Even though the expected time between bid updates is much
greater than the expected latency, the heavy tail corresponding to the shape pa-
rameter βc = 0.75 implies there is a chance—due to network lag—that a new
bid update might be considered before the previous bid has been received by the
auction.
To characterize the effects of latency and asynchronicity on the outcomes of
the progressive second-price auction we consider an ensemble E of 100 realizations
for the random processes given by ∆c
i and ∆e
i. Note that the ensemble used in
Section 3 was over random initial bids. In this section we hold the initial bids fixed.

10
Jordana Blazek, Eric Olson, Fredrick C. Harris, Jr.
Fig. 2. Left shows that changing the scale λc of the communication
latency has minimal effect on the ensemble-averaged price and total
utility received by all buyers. Right shows the average value and cost
for each individual buyer when λc = 1.
 13.2
 13.22
 13.24
 13.26
 13.28
 13.3
 5
 10
 15
 20
 2300
 2350
 2400
 2450
 2500
 2550
 2600
 2650
 2700
⟨E[p]⟩
⟨S[u]⟩
expected price
total utility
λc
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 0
 10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100
value
cost
average with deviation
buyer number
Now, for ω ∈E let sw denote the equilibrium state obtained from the Algorithm 1
subject to the communication delays and market evaluations specified by ω.
Figure 2 on the left depicts the ensemble averages of the bid prices and total
utility as a function of the scale of the communications latency with λc ranging
from the default value of 1.0 shown in Figure 1 up to 20. The shadows illustrate
the standard deviations of the ensembles given by V [⟨E[p]⟩]1/2 and V [⟨S[u]⟩]1/2.
The deviations are small while the bid prices and total utility are horizontal to
within the errors.
On the right Figure 2 depicts the predictability of individual outcomes for
the 62 buyers who received allocations in the market. The remaining 28 buyers
consistently did not receive allocations and are not shown. We plot the values
and costs for each buyer given by respectively setting X equal vi and ci in (7).
Some buyers experienced much higher deviations in outcomes compared to others.
This also happened to the same buyers over different ensembles. Similar results
affecting different individuals were observed for other populations of buyers.
Since demand is perfectly elastic, then buyer utility ui = vi −ci is ar-
guably more important than either the value or cost on their own. The deviation
V [⟨ui⟩]1/2 was computed for the ensemble shown in Figure 2 and found to be
uniformly less than 1.3 for all buyers while deviations in cost and value were
more than 25 for some buyers.
5
Different Latencies
This section studies whether buyers who compute their ε-best reply more fre-
quently and experience less latency in their bid messages have any advantage
over buyers who analyze the market less frequently and whose bid messages suf-
fer greater latencies. Consider a population of 100 buyers with valuation curves
such that
θi+50 = θi
for
i = 1, 2, . . . , 50.

The Effects of Latency on a Progressive Second-Price Auction
11
The first 50 buyers are identical twins of the last 50 buyers with one difference:
The last 50 buyers are lazy and evaluate the market less frequently and experience
more latency in their bid messages.
Specifically, the first 50 buyers keep the same bid evaluation frequency and
latency as in Table 1 while the delay and scale parameters δc, δe, λc and λe for
the last 50 buyers are multiplied by a factor of 17. This leads to an auction with
two time scales: One set by the industrious buyers and the other by the lazy
buyers.
Fig. 3. The outcomes for lazy buyers who evaluate the market 17 times
less frequently and experience 17 times the latency in their bid messages
compared to an equal number of industrious buyers with identical val-
uations.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
vertical scales
offset for clarity
industrious
17x lazier
utility
time
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 5
 10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50
industrious
17x lazier
average utility with deviation
twin number
Figure 3 depicts the outcomes of the first 50 buyers compared their identical
but lazy twins, the last 50 buyers. The graph on the left shows the transient
part of the utility received over time for representative pair of buyer twins. After
making an ε-best reply, either twin obtains the same utility from the market as
the other. However, the difference in the time scales allows the industrious twin to
maintain non-zero utility for a larger percentage of the time. As the equilibrium
state is reached—not shown—the rate of bid updates slows down so much that
the fact that one twin is 17 times slower than the other no longer matters.
In the end, both twins obtain essentially the same utility at the equilibrium
state. Figure 3 on the right illustrates the statistics for the same twin pairs taken
over an ensemble E of size 100. The outcomes in terms of individually received
utility are indistinguishable between the industrious and lazy twin. There is also
very little deviation in outcomes due to the asynchronous nature of the individual
market evaluations and the communication latencies. This is consistent with the
uniformly small deviations in utility observed in the previous section.
6
Conclusions
We have introduced a method to construct ε-Nash equilibria consisting of truthful
bids in which each buyer imposes zero externality on the other buyers and demon-

12
Jordana Blazek, Eric Olson, Fredrick C. Harris, Jr.
strated through simulation that this algorithm converges. Although it is known
that the method of truthful ε-best replies may fail to converge unless ε is large
enough, it is possible the introduction of compromise bids removes the condition
on ε. A theoretical proof of such a possibility seems out of reach; however, a more
modest result is planned for future work. Namely, if one assumes Algorithm 1
converges, then we conjecture Algorithm 2 preserves that convergence.
Including a reserve price at which the seller purchases their own resource pre-
vents the zero-revenue equilibrium states found by Algorithm 2 and reduces the
variability in revenue outcomes without reducing efficiency, provided the reserve
is not set too high. Although it is possible that a revenue-minimizing equilibrium
occurs from the random initialization of bids, an interesting avenue for future
study is whether compromise bids made by a subset of buyers—perhaps orga-
nized through social media—would be sufficient to reach a revenue-minimizing
equilibrium in the presence of other buyers who continue to bid only ε-best replies.
We have considered renewal processes governed by Weibull distributions to
model communication latency and the delay between market evaluation times.
While the individual outcomes of value and cost had large deviations for some
buyers, deviations in utility were uniformly small. This is a desirable property
since utility is the important outcome for the case of elastic demand considered
in this auction model.
Communication delays imply the truthful ε-best replies while still truthful
might no longer be ε-best by the time they reach the seller. Therefore, we were
surprised that Algorithm 1 continued to converge no matter how much we in-
creased the latency. Moreover, given the dramatically different timescales for the
random processes employed in the identical twin simulations, even more remark-
able was that the individual utility and bid prices at the ε-Nash equilibria had so
little dependency on the random elements in the market mechanism. These are
desirable properties for any distributed asynchronous method of finding optima.
In accordance with Algorithm 1 our simulations send a new bid—whether the
previous bid has been received or not—only if the new bid is ε-better than the
previously sent bid. Because of the decreasing hazard rate in the communications
network, a previously sent bid which has not been activated yet is even less likely
to be activated as time goes on. For this reason it could be advantageous for
a buyer to send a new bid that does not improve on a previous bid simply
because the previous bid has lagged in the network. The authors consider such a
modification to Algorithm 1 and similar modifications based on amortization of
bid cost over time to be interesting directions for future research.
References
1. Muhammad Asad Arfeen, K. Pawlikowski, D. McNickle and A. Willig, The Role of the
Weibull Distribution in Modeling Internet Access and Backbone Core Networks, Journal
of Network and Computer Applications, Vol. 141, 2019, pp. 1–22.
2. Laleh Arshadi and Amir H. Jahangir, An Empirical Study on TCP Flow Interarrival Time
Distribution for Normal and Anomalous Traffic, International Journal of Communication
Systems, Vol. 30, 2017, pp 1–19.

The Effects of Latency on a Progressive Second-Price Auction
13
3. Felix Brandt and Tuomas Sandholm, On the Existence of Unconditionally Privacy-
Preserving Auction Protocols, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., Vol. 11, No. 2:05, pages 21,
2008, doi: 10.1145/1330332.1330338.
4. Jordan Blocher and Frederick C. Harris Jr., An Equilibrium Analysis of a Secondary Mobile
Data-Share Market, Information, Vol. 12, No. 434, 28 pages, 2021.
5. Jordana Blazek and Frederick C. Harris Jr. and Eric Olson, Bipartiteness in Progressive
Second-Price Multi-Auction Networks with Perfect Substitute, in progress, 2025.
6. Jordana Blazek and Frederick C. Harris Jr. and Eric Olson, Exclusion-Compensation in
Multi-Auction Markets with Perfect Substitute and Information, in progress, 2026.
7. Peng Jia and Peter Caines, Analysis of a Class of Decentralized Decision Processes: Quan-
tized Progressive Second Price Auctions, Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control, 6 pages, January 2008.
8. Aurel A. Lazar and Nemo Semret, Design and Analysis of the Progressive Second Price
Auction for Network Bandwidth Sharing, Research Gate, 32 pages, 1999.
9. A. Delenda, Patrick Maillé and Bruno Tuffin, Reserve price in progressive second price
auctions, Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposium on Computers And Commu-
nications, IEEE, Vol. 2, pp. 755–759, 2004.
10. Patrick Maillé, Market clearing price and equilibria of the progressive second price mecha-
nism, RAIRO - Operations Research - Recherche Opérationnelle, Vol. 41, No. 4, pp. 465–478,
2007, http://www.numdam.org/articles/10.1051/ro:2007030/.
11. Nemo Semret, Market Mechanism for Network Resource Sharing, Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia
University, 1999.
12. Nemo Semret, Raymond Liao, Andrew Campbell and Aurel Lazar, Pricing, provisioning and
peering: dynamic markets for differentiated Internet services and implications for network
interconnections, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 18, No. 12, pp.
2499–2513, December 2000, doi: 10.1109/49.898733.
13. William Vickrey, Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive Sealed Tenders, Journal
of Finance, 1961, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 8-37, doi: 10.2307/2977633.
