DesignerlyLoop: Bridging the Cognitive Gap through Visual
Node-Based Reasoning in Human–AI Collaborative Design
Anqi Wang
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
Zhengyi Li
Central South University
Changsha, China
Xin Tong
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou)
Guangzhou, China
Pan Hui
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou)
Guangzhou, China
Figure 1: Overview of DesignerlyLoop, an LLM-based design tool, highlighting its three key mechanisms. The workflow
starts with (1) Input Design Context. Then, (2) Map to Node-linked Diagram enables the Customized Structure
mechanism (B). Finally, (3) LLM Chain leverages the Curated Reasoning mechanism to generate solutions (C). An
Iterative Loop allows for continuous refinement by switching between the design canvas and reasoning views (B, C).
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) offer powerful support for
design tasks, yet their goal-oriented, single-turn responses
often misalign with the nonlinear, exploratory nature of de-
sign processes. This mismatch creates a cognitive gap, limiting
designers’ ability to articulate evolving intentions, critically
evaluate outputs, and maintain creative agency. To address
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.
Conference acronym ’XX, Woodstock, NY
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to
ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
these challenges, we developed DesignerlyLoop, a visual node-
based system that embeds LLM reasoning chains into the de-
sign workflow. The system enables designers to externalize
and curate reasoning structures, iteratively organize inten-
tions, and interact with LLMs as dynamic cognitive engines
rather than static answer providers. We conducted a within-
subject study with 20 designers, combining qualitative and
quantitative methods, and found that DesignerlyLoop enhanced
creative reflection, design quality, and interaction experience
by supporting systematic engagement with both human and
machine reasoning. These findings highlight the potential of
structured, interactive visualization to transform human–AI
co-creation into a reflective and iterative design process.
CCS Concepts
• Human-centered computing →Human computer in-
teraction (HCI); Empirical studies in HCI; • Applied com-
puting →Computer-aided design.
arXiv:2511.15331v1  [cs.HC]  19 Nov 2025

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
Keywords
human-AI collaboration, reasoning, design, creativity, AI-assisted
design, Large language model (LLM), LLM chain
ACM Reference Format:
Anqi Wang, Zhengyi Li, Xin Tong, and Pan Hui. 2018. DesignerlyLoop:
Bridging the Cognitive Gap through Visual Node-Based Reasoning
in Human–AI Collaborative Design. In Proceedings of Make sure to
enter the correct conference title from your rights confirmation email
(Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 27 pages. https:
//doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
Introduction
Recent works support the superior capabilities of large lan-
guage models (LLMs), such as Generative Pre-trained Trans-
former 4 (GPT-4) [68], in addressing the diverse needs of design
process [6, 86]: design ideation [16, 36, 83], concept develop-
ment [3, 49, 98, 100, 117], assistant materials [7], and problem-
solving [26, 95, 105]. As design is a cognitive demanding ac-
tivity that involves navigating ambiguity while iteratively
refining outputs toward an intended goal [10, 48, 54], designer
often engage with LLMs through multi-turn dialogues to clar-
ify core ideas or address complex problems. In such scenarios,
designers frequently encounter challenges when attempting to
explore open-ended design intent. To address this, building a
tool to support “exploratory design intent” during a non-linear
process is significant. This capability is crucial for fostering
open-ended exploration [20, 31], enabling designers to exter-
nalize evolving ideas [27, 91], navigate ambiguity [5, 79], and
iteratively refine intent [23, 69] through structured yet flexible
interaction with LLMs. It empowers designers to maintain
creative agency while benefiting from the generative and ana-
lytical strengths of the model.
However, a fundamental cognitive gap exists between de-
signers and LLMs. While LLMs typically operate through di-
rect, goal-oriented reasoning to produce definitive answers,
design processes are nonlinear, ambiguous, and exploratory,
driven by loosely defined intent and iterative sense-making.
This mismatch forces designers to navigate the black-box
nature of LLMs with little visibility into underlying reason-
ing [58, 108, 114], making it difficult to evaluate or steer sys-
tem behavior. Moreover, single-turn interaction patterns con-
strain the articulation of vague intent, often yielding generic
or irrelevant responses [38, 113]. These limitations reduce
opportunities for critical thinking and intentional direction-
setting [2, 109, 117]. Without scaffolding, designers risk skip-
ping key cognitive steps such as planning, execution, and
reflection, leading to over-reliance on LLM outputs and weak-
ened independent judgment [93]. Addressing these gaps re-
quires systems that not only generate outputs but also scaffold
exploratory reasoning, reflection, and interpretability through-
out the design process.
One promising solution is visualizing structured cognitive
representations used by designers (e.g., through mind map
diagrams)- to define goals, apply reasoning strategies, and nav-
igate ambiguous problems [44, 76, 80, 81, 93, 96, 104]. Design
field often employs this visualizing method. Current graphic-
based LLM tools have focused on mapping iterative ideas or
externalizing evolving contexts in a designer-LLM co-creation
(e.g., [16, 83, 109]), as well as non-linear organization and
interaction (e.g., in design [56, 57] and non-design context
(e.g., [47, 116]). By articulating and visualizing their evolving
design intent and underlying reasoning structures, designers
can create shared representations that contextualize LLM out-
puts, reduce ambiguity, and support reflective iteration [109].
In this way, this visualized method not only scaffold human
thinking but also enable LLMs to participate in the co-creation
of design, forming a dynamic and collaborative reasoning pro-
cess [4, 9, 41].
However, existing studies overlooked intentionally curated
reasoning in the co-creation design process. Despite explored
LLM-driven reasoning strategies in co-creation (e.g. Ideation-
Web [83] and CoExploreDS [16]), designers have limitation
on controllability of reasoning during evolving context. For
instance, CoExploreDS applies various reasoning strategies but
still produces single-turn outputs, lacking user controllability
supporting for interactive, multi-turn reasoning that aligns
with the evolving needs of design. In addition, bridging the
cognitive gap requires iterative evaluation and customized
structure (e.g., representing hierarchy, order, relationship)
using graphic-based tools. First, this process requires iterative
loops to support reflective evaluation of both human- and
machine-generated reasoning [93]. Second, this process need
to support designers to organize intent using hierarchical, tem-
poral, or relational logic, rather than fixed-structure graphs in
most existing tools. Supporting diverse organizational formats
is essential for externalizing varied cognitive process.
Inspired current tools curating LLM chains that benefit
user controllability using explicitly exposing reasoning logic
and connection structure that allows to continuous iteration
(e.g., [46, 93, 107, 108]), we highlights the significance of sup-
porting design intent is that tools must support “articulating
reasoning structures” and “mapping system behaviors” [93].
Using graphic visualizing method, this involves (1) curating
system reasoning models (2) modelling user intent, and (3)
supporting user-driven iteration. Thus, our research questions
are: How can a graphic co-creative system be designed to sup-
port reasoning process of LLM during exploring design intent,
bridging the cognitive gap between designer and LLMs?
To address these challenges, we propose DesignerlyLoop, a
visual node-based system that integrates a curated LLM rea-
soning chain into designer–LLM co-creation. DesignerlyLoop
combines a diagrammatic interface with real-time LLM execu-
tion, enabling designers to construct, test, and iterate on multi-
step reasoning. By embedding LLMs directly in the design
environment, the system offers immediate semantic feedback,
supports prompt chaining, and externalizes users’ evolving
design logic. In a within-subject study with 20 designers, De-
signerlyLoop supported both the formation of design intent
and critical reflection. Qualitative and quantitative results indi-
cated improvements in interaction experience, creativity, and

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
design quality, as participants systematically engaged with rea-
soning and actively curated LLM outputs rather than passively
accepting suggestions. These findings suggest that embedding
LLMs as structured, interactive reasoning engines can fos-
ter more reflective, iterative, and higher-quality human–AI
co-creation.
Our contributions are threefold: (1) Proposing key insights
of graphic-based designer-AI collaborative tools for forming
design intent, including three challenges and design guidelines
in a formative study; (2) Developing DesignerlyLoop process-
ing a two-tied structure reasoning process with customized
organization and iterative evaluation by combining the design
process and AI thinking path; (3) Demonstrating the bene-
fits of DesignerlyLoop in supporting design intent with better
experience and higher creativity supports during human-AI
collaboration process.
2
Related Works
2.1
Forming Design Intent
2.1.1
Defining Design Intent. Design intent rarely emerges
fully formed. Instead, it unfolds iteratively through sense-
making, prototyping, and reflection as designers engage with
evolving constraints and materials [35]. In such exploratory
process, intent may manifest as ambiguous metaphors or af-
fective narratives in the early phrase, later refined into clearer
propositions [90]. HCI tools—such as sketch canvases, ver-
sioned annotations, and timeline overlays—can scaffold this
gradual externalization and stabilization of intent over time [16,
22, 59, 82, 83, 94].
2.1.2
Forming Intent from Diverse Supports. Creative design
processes oriented around the articulation and refinement of
intent require nuanced system support that accommodates
the evolving and situated nature of intent formation. Drawing
from cognitive models of creativity and interaction design
literature [30, 45, 65, 74, 81, 84, 103], we identify three critical
dimensions along which design tools must support intent-
driven practices:
Non-Linear design loops. Creative design intent does not
progress linearly but evolves through recursive loops involv-
ing exploration, reinterpretation, and reformulation [13, 24, 29,
117]. Designers fluidly transition between divergent/conver-
gent thinking across research, ideation, and critique phases [10,
57] This loop feature necessitates tools that accommodate:
(1) Intent reformulation triggered by new constraints, user
feedback, or serendipitous discoveries; (2) Stage-agnostic in-
put mechanisms that allow ideation at any point in the pro-
cess [32, 40]; (3) Concept tracing features and timeline visual-
ization to revisit and branch design paths [93]. Systems should
thus enable temporal fluidity, branching, and re-entry, rather
than enforce prescriptive workflows.
Diverse representational forms. Design intent manifest het-
erogeneously across practitioners even when addressing iden-
tical goals. Diverse solutions emerge through varied empha-
sis on visual semantics, functional aims, user considerations,
or prototype fidelity, reflecting distinct value judgments and
objectives [15, 52]. This diversity necessitates interfaces that
fluidly adapt to individual designer’s evolving representational
needs.
Dialogic co-creation. Building on Schön’s notion of “conver-
sation with materials”, design is an iterative dialogue where
emerging artifacts influence cognition and action. Intent for-
mation is not solely internal but shaped through back-and-
forth interaction with evolving prototypes, sketches, and other
intermediaries [74]. Design tools should therefore treat arti-
facts not just as outputs but as conversational partners—surfacing
meaningful responses that invite reflection, reinterpretation,
and thematic development.
2.1.3
LLM Capabilities for Building Design Around Intent. The
breakthrough of prompting LLMs (e.g. GTP-4o [68], Deepseek,
Claude) exhibit three core capabilities enabling novel approaches
to intent-driven design: First, LLMs’ advanced natural lan-
guage comprehension allows designers to verbally externalize
and refine ambiguous intent through iterative dialogue [68].
This capability transforms linguistic expressions directly into
executable specifications, facilitating on-demand tool creation
without technical retraining. The recursive interaction pat-
tern supports continuous intent disambiguation via semantic
negotiation [14].
Second, as reflective collaborators, LLMs demonstrate cog-
nitive partnership across creative domains [12, 71, 112]. They
enable bidirectional sense-making where both human and AI
agents progressively adapt their reasoning, surpassing tools
requiring unilateral user adaptation [30, 85].
Third, LLMs perform abductive inference—generating plau-
sible hypotheses under uncertainty—through frameworks like
ReAct that integrate reasoning with action [111]. This capabil-
ity facilitates contextual intent inference with under-specified
goals, consequence anticipation prior to implementation, and
comparative solution evaluation. Crucially, LLMs enable ana-
logical adaptation of known forms to novel problems through
cross-domain knowledge transfer. This aligns with Peirce’s
conception of abduction as “inference to the best explana-
tion” [1]. By translating abstract concepts into executable
specifications while maintaining semantic coherence across it-
erative refinements, LLMs scaffold design intent as a dynamic
cognitive process co-negotiated between human and artificial
agents.
2.2
AI Graph-Based Creativity Tool and
Human-AI Co-Creation
The fundamental cognitive gap between LLM and designer
makes it difficult for designers to align their evolving de-
sign process with the structured outputs provided by LLMs.
LLM often response with direct, objective-driven, and turn-
based outputs (e.g., via instructive prompts like “You are a
[role]”) [2, 93, 109, 117]. In contrast, design is inherently non-
linear, iterative, and ambiguous, often characterized as dealing
with “ill-defined problems” due to incomplete or evolving
problem information [88].

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
Graph-based interfaces resolve this gap by enhancing ed-
itability and information representation, thereby supporting
nonlinear design workflows. Such interfaces enable refine-
ment, regeneration, and navigation across design iterations
[16, 19, 47, 56, 57, 75, 83, 87, 107, 109]. These tools extend es-
tablished visual methods (e.g., mind maps, concept maps, node-
link diagrams) that scaffold ideation and systems thinking in
design research [11, 67]. By facilitating multi-turn iteration
and pipeline composition, they introduce novel LLM interac-
tion paradigms. Shokrizadeh et al. [87] enables UI ideation
through version navigation on a canvas. Lin and Martelaro
[57]’s Jigsaw system supports cross-modal AI pipeline con-
struction (e.g., integrating ChatGPT and Midjourney). He et al.
[36] employs an LLM-enhanced canvas for group ideation with
structured sticky notes. Graph structures further serve as inter-
mediary representations for prompt steering by decomposing
text prompts into hierarchical elements [74, 110]. Systems like
AI-Instruments [74] utilize fragmented prompt cards to en-
able continuous intent refinement. However, some inherent
limitations of current graph-based approaches constrain their
design support capability. Limited controllability and inter-
pretability can erode human trust in AI systems [55, 72, 97].
Moreover, users may become overwhelmed by the accumu-
lation of prompts and AI-generated outputs during extended
exploration [33].
Designer-LLM co-creation shows particular promise dur-
ing conceptualization. AI agents function as co-creators that
introduce varied inputs in parallel, enhancing conceptual di-
versity [39, 62, 63]. Empirical evidence indicates that even
brief exposure to AI-generated ideas stimulates novel concep-
tual directions [53]. However, persistent concerns regarding
authorship ambiguity, over-reliance, and diminished human
agency require resolution [73]. Scholars have increasingly
employed visualized approaches to represent co-creation pro-
cess, not only increasing model understanding but also pre-
serving user ownership and intentionality [2, 74, 83, 94, 109].
IdeationWeb [83], for instance, empirically applied four distinct
human-AI co-creation strategies in design ideas, yet its single-
turn generation mechanism still limited user controllability.
One type of these studies focusing on reasoning processes in
such co-creation processes have shown potential to address
this issue. Jamplate [109] employs design templates (i.e., Five
Whys, Competitive Analysis) to facilitate progressive, step-
wise solution refinement and cognitive elicitation. However,
its use of fixed node-link structures inadequately captures
the evolving nature of design processes, thereby constrain-
ing emergent exploration. CoExploreDS [16] fills this gap by
employing node-linked diagram enables track and visualize
idea development, capturing logical relationships and concep-
tual similarities. Furthermore, this work leverage analogical,
inductive, abductive and analogical reasoning to guide LLM
thinking during ideation [16].
Nevertheless, these systems still provide insufficient user
control over the underlying reasoning processes. Users are left
with multiple rounds of what is essentially one-time generated
content to continually refine. Externalizing reasoning paths
enables designers to evaluate LLM cognition and better align
outputs with design goals. Our work aims to explore a more
explicit externalization of reasoning strategies to extend this
boundary by enabling bidirectional integration between de-
sign representations and LLM reasoning—transforming visual
design diagrams into editable interfaces for AI interaction.
3
Formative Study
Study Goal. The formative study aimed to explore how de-
signers construct and externalize their design intentions with
the support of LLMs. We focused on identifying current prac-
tices, challenges, and expectations for LLM-assisted design
tools, in order to inform the design of our prototype system.
Participants. We recruited eight designers (5 female, 3 males)
aged 23-30 year. Among them, four were experienced experts
(e.g., visual communication designer, UX designer, urban de-
signs) with over eight years of professional practice. Given the
prevalence of ChatGPT as a widely adopted LLM, our study
centered on participants’ experiences with ChatGPT or similar
tools.
Procedure. The study consisted of two parts. First, we con-
ducted a 30-minute hands-on task with three participants,
asking them to create a design concept using GPT and present
their outcomes in Figma, a popular visual design tool. We
recorded the prompts they used and thematically coded the
resulting use cases. After this task, participants engaged in a
short semi-structured interview reflecting on their workflow
and tool experience. Second, we conducted in-depth semi-
structured interviews with the remaining participants. These
interviews focused on three core areas: (1) how designers
typically form design intent, (2) what kinds of information
they provide to GPT during this process, and (3) how they
envision future AI-based tools to better support conceptual
development.
Data Collection and Analysis. All interviews were conducted
in Chinese via video calls and lasted 45–90 minutes. Audio
recordings were transcribed using iFlytek and manually cor-
rected for accuracy. Chinese excerpts used in analysis or re-
porting were translated into English with DeepL; translations
were subsequently reviewed and revised to maintain concep-
tual fidelity and preserve design-specific terminology.
We employed reflexive thematic analysis [8]. Two researchers
independently performed open coding on the full Chinese
transcripts and field notes from the 30-minute hands-on ses-
sions. Code sets were compared in weekly calibration meet-
ings, during which discrepancies were resolved and the code-
book was iteratively refined. A senior researcher audited the
evolving codebook and thematic structure to ensure coherence
and methodological rigor. After finalizing the codebook, both
coders applied it across the dataset using an inductive–deductive
strategy aligned with the research questions. Analytic memos
were maintained throughout to document coding decisions

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
and translation clarifications. Themes were derived by syn-
thesizing recurring patterns and triangulating insights from
interviews and observed design practices.
3.1
Forming Design Intent and AI Support
Needs
Designers typically initiate the formation of design intent
through a non-linear, internally guided process grounded
in personal philosophies, contextual awareness, and domain
knowledge. Rather than using GPT to define initial goals, par-
ticipants emphasized leveraging their own frameworks and
relying on the model to support specific sub-tasks. For exam-
ple, P4 remarked that “designers already have their own logic
and frameworks in mind,” using GPT primarily for assistance
with underexplored areas such as demographic scenarios or
spatial constraints.
Participants described interacting with GPT as if it were
an all-knowing interlocutor, integrating it across all stages
of the design process. As P2 noted, “I use GPT whenever I’m
stuck or need a new perspective—it’s like chatting with someone
who knows everything.” Designers often input large amounts
of fragmented thoughts—“bits and pieces”—which GPT helps
to structure into coherent concept maps. It also excels at sum-
marizing, expanding, and organizing these fragmented inputs,
thereby enabling clarity during early ideation. P6 described
a practice of creating project-specific folders, each contain-
ing multiple conversations, noting that “the more we talk, the
more it understands the project.” In addition, GPT was valued
for accelerating research tasks such as user journey mapping,
persona creation, and gathering background information. It
was also used to simulate stakeholder perspectives, aiding
empathy-driven design.
3.2
Challenges of Using AI to Construct
Design Intent
3.2.1
C1: Shallow Reasoning and Fragile Conceptual
Development. Participants frequently used GPT to articu-
late and shape design ideas, but consistently faced shallow
reasoning and fragile conceptual outputs. Responses were
often generic, repetitive, and risk-averse, limiting meaning-
ful synthesis. As P1 noted, “It talks a lot, but nothing really
useful”; P5 added that GPT “rarely makes explicit how those
patterns are reasoned”. Experienced users mitigated issues via
curated examples or structured templates (P3), but novices
struggled without extensive prompt engineering. GPT was
mainly employed for narrow tasks such as generating point-
of-view statements or blueprints (P4, P8), acting as a modular
assistant rather than a co-creator (P7).
3.2.2
C2: Contextual Forgetfulness and Information Frag-
mentation. Participants reported breakdowns in contextual
continuity after 5–10 conversational turns, with GPT losing
track of earlier references or reusing terms inconsistently. P4
remarked, “Sometimes it brings in examples from another project
I mentioned days ago”. This necessitated repeated restatements
of goals, increasing cognitive load. Experts occasionally used
“design folders” to preserve topic fidelity, but novices were more
prone to drifting focus. Designers highlighted that multiple
factors (e.g., safety regulations, lighting) intersect, requiring
GPT to link and contextualize concepts across turns, a capa-
bility currently limited.
3.2.3
C3: Limited Support for Core Design Intent and
Multi-Dimensional Integration. GPT struggled to engage
with core design intent and conceptual frameworks, producing
outputs often generic and lacking nuanced rationale. P7 ob-
served, “GPT’s outputs tend to miss the subtle reasoning required
to align with established design ideologies”. Participants used
GPT mainly for pattern recognition after intent formation
(P5, P2), and envisioned future systems allowing intervention
checkpoints and modular assistance to integrate fragmented
knowledge (P8).
3.3
Design Goals
3.3.1
DG1: Node-Based Scaffolding for Structured De-
sign Reasoning. To address shallow reasoning (C1), LLM
tools should support decomposition of abstract ideas into
modular reasoning tasks, enabling stepwise exploration of
metaphors, aesthetics, and design logic [38, 113]. Nodes host
focused prompt templates targeting specific cognitive func-
tions (P1, P6), enhancing conceptual depth. P2 noted, “It helps
me push my ideas deeper when the model knows exactly what
kind of decision I’m trying to make”.
3.3.2
DG2: Cross-Node Context Persistence for Sustained
Conceptual Coherence. To mitigate contextual forgetful-
ness (C2), systems should embed memory slots or topic an-
chors within nodes, tracking evolving goals. P7 commented, “If
it could just remember what I told it three nodes ago, I wouldn’t
have to reset everything all the time”. Linking related nodes
enables LLMs to synthesize insights across threads, supporting
layered, long-range ideation (P4).
3.3.3
DG3: Configurable LLM Chains for Multi-Dimensional
Design Integration. For holistic synthesis (C3), systems should
allow users to configure LLM chains integrating diverse con-
cerns such as environmental, demographic, regulatory, and aes-
thetic factors. P3 highlighted, “It’s not about listing ideas—it’s
about threading them into something meaningful”. Chains or-
chestrate multi-node reasoning and provide checkpoints for
intermediate synthesis (P8, P4).
3.4
Prototyping Design and Iteration
3.4.1
Initial Prototype Design. To translate the design goals
(DG1–DG3) into a tangible system, we first developed a mini-
mum viable prototype (MVP) that captured the essential mech-
anisms of our approach. The MVP was organized around three
core panels: Based on DG1–DG3, the prototype supports cu-
rated reasoning at both design and LLM levels, with three
panels: 1) design pipeline grounding (Design Context Builder);

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
2) design canvas (Design Reasoning Canvas); 3) LLM chain
(LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer).
3.4.2
Prototype Iteration. We then conducted two co-design
workshops with six HCI and UX experts to iteratively refine
the prototype. Each workshop began with a demonstration
of the prototype, then walkthrough of the MVP and a guided
design task, followed by critical reflection and structured feed-
back. This process enabled us to assess the usability of core
features, identify breakdowns in workflow alignment, and
prioritize enhancements that would increase reflective engage-
ment without overloading users.
3.4.3
Iteration Outcomes. Insights from the workshops in-
formed a set of key refinements to the prototype: (1) exporting
AI chain node outputs to the main design canvas; (2) auto-
matic chain generation from design-level prompts; (3) LLM-
driven determination of reasoning type per node; (4) unique
LLM chain usage per node; (5) grouping/classifying nodes; (6)
user-customizable editing and organization of LLM outputs.
Collectively, these refinements advanced the prototype from a
proof-of-concept to a more robust system aligned with expert
design practices.
4
System Design
To support designers in co-creating with LLMs and forming
design intent, we developed DesignerlyLoop—a visual node-
link diagram system that scaffolds controllable LLM reasoning
for goal-aligned human–AI collaboration. The system forms
a continuous iterative loop that enables users to articulate
high-level design goals, externalize their cognitive process,
and iteratively engage with LLM-generated reasoning chains.
DesignerlyLoop’s integrating capabilities help users: (1) under-
stand and evaluate the LLM’s cognitive process; (2) re-align
LLM behavior with user intent.
4.1
DesignerlyLoop Interaction Design
As illustrated in Figure 2, DesignerlyLoop comprises three pri-
mary panels: Panel A Design Context Builder, Panel B Design
Reasoning Canvas, and Panel C LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer.
Design intent is treated not as a fixed goal but as a moving
target shaped through iterative loops.
4.1.1
Panel A: Design Context Builder. Panel A supports align-
ment between high-level design intent and concrete execution-
level steps (DG3). Users define design background, goals, and
stylistic preferences (Figure 2-A). Based on this input, the
system automatically generates a sequenced design nodes—a
structured list of design process (Figure 2 a.2) forming the foun-
dation for downstream processes. Users can edit keywords to
tailor the node-link diagram in Panel B (Section 4.1.2).
4.1.2
Panel B: Design Reasoning Canvas. Panel B externalizes
and structures evolving design steps via a customizable, node-
based digital canvas (Figure 2-B). Each node contains editable
content, including a title and segmented blocks documenting
subgoals, hypotheses, or cognitive tasks (e.g. “Concept De-
sign,”“Dynamic Learning Island Design” in Figure 2-B). Users
can flexibly add, remove, reorder, or connect design nodes, as
well as using a node with content generated by AI, AI node,
to override or supplement existing diagram structures. Node
colors, layouts, and link can be customized to indicate cogni-
tive paths or design phases. Multi-path linking and reordering
enable parallel exploration of alternative directions. Panel B
scaffolds alignment between the user’s design cognition (DG2)
and the LLM’s structured understanding.
4.1.3
Panel C: LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer. Panel C enables
the generation of an LLM reasoning chain (Figure 2 c.2) embed-
ded within a design node within Panel B. By double-clicking a
design node, users open Panel C and specify a “goal” in natural
language, which guides LLM reasoning style and exploratory
scope (Figure 3). The panel then produces a multi-step chain
with sequential or divergent (parallel) structures, making the
LLM’s reasoning process explicit. Each chain node is aligned
with both a design stage of the Double Diamond model [77]
and one of four reasoning methods—inductive, deductive, ab-
ductive, or analogical [16] (Figure 4; detailed prompts in Ap-
pendix A.3.1). Figure 5 illustrates two representative chain
forms, showing how reasoning methods are applied at the
node level.
For co-creation, users can add, delete, revise, annotate, and
reorder nodes (Figure 2 c.4). LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer
further supports human–AI collaboration through functions
such as: Addition—introducing new ideas or contextual de-
tails, which the LLM integrates into supplementary nodes;
Deletion—removing irrelevant nodes, prompting the LLM to
adapt reasoning paths; Revision—adjusting wording or scope,
leading the LLM to regenerate content; and Prompt refine-
ment—reformulating inputs to explore alternative trajecto-
ries. Users can also regenerate content by editing the node
title and clicking “Regenerate” (Figure 2 c.5).
Once refined, nodes can be externalized as sticky notes in
Panel B or C via “Create Node”, integrated into the evolving
diagram through “Output to Canvas” (c.6), or saved for later
iteration (c.7). This reciprocal workflow enables designers
to steer ideation through targeted interventions, while the
LLM expands and operationalizes their intent into structured
reasoning artifacts.
Panel C addresses DG1: Enabling curated construction
and adjustment of LLM reasoning chains by supporting
controllability, co-creation, and subgoal iteration. By mapping
LLM outputs to interpretable reasoning categories, the system
enhances transparency and empowers users to direct problem-
solving. Bidirectional linkage between reasoning structures
and design representations enables fluid co-creation where
visual structure actively embody reasoning logic, deepening
human–AI alignment.

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Figure 2: DesignerlyLoop comprises three main interfaces: (A) Design Context Builder Panel, (B) Design Reasoning
Canvas, and (C) LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer. Users input design context in (a.1), generating an editable keyword
pipeline (a.2). Clicking “Generate” (a.3) produces a node-link diagram in (B), supporting customized edits (e.g., add,
delete, modify nodes). Double-clicking a node (b.1) opens (C-1), where users specify goals (c.1) and obtain LLM-
generated reasoning nodes (c.2). Each node offers multiple design suggestions (c.3) and co-creation functions (c.4),
including content addition, deletion, revision, or regeneration via prompt refinement (c.5). Finalized outputs can be
“Output to Canvas” (c.6), saved (c.7) and checked alongside the canvas (C-2).
Figure 3: Pipeline for LLM chain generation by the designer in Panel C. When double-clicking a design node, Panel C
opens as a popup, where users (A) input a specific “goal” for in-depth exploration under the current design node; (B)
click “Generate” to (C) map the input into structured prompts, including task, requirements, context, output, and
examples; and (D) produce an LLM chain that generates both sequential and parallel chain structures with prompt
requirements and output formats.
4.2
DesignerlyLoop for Human–LLM
Collaboration
These three panels collectively form an integrated reasoning
loop that supports designers in iterating between goal articu-
lation, design structuring, and LLM collaboration. Specifically,

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
Figure 4: Pipeline for LLM output generation within each chain node in Panel C, where users (A) “Run” a chain node to
obtain the initial LLM output. The system then (B) applies an LLM prompt to identify the corresponding design stage
in the Double Diamond model (Appendix A.3.2) and (C) applies another prompt to specify the reasoning method(s)
(Appendix A.3.1). Finally, (D) the system generates the refined LLM output accordingly.
Figure 5: Generated reasoning chains in LLM Reason-
ing Chain Viewer may be sequential or parallel. Each
chain node combines a primary and secondary reasoning
method, selected from inductive, deductive, abductive,
or analogical reasoning.
Panel A Design Context Builder captures abstract design goals
and preferences, Panel B Design Reasoning Canvas external-
izes and elaborates the user’s cognitive process via node-based
mapping, and Panel C LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer visualizes
and supports revision of the LLM reasoning chain in response
to user feedback. This loop enables designers to reflectively
engage with the LLM, enhancing transparency, creative con-
trol, and alignment between intent and generation throughout
the co-design process.
4.2.1
Example User Walkthrough. To illustrate DesignerlyLoop
in action, we present a walkthrough scenario based on an
interface design. Designer Lin explores layout strategies for
an interactive storytelling app for children.
The session begins in Panel A Design Context Builder, where
Lin defines a high-level design brief: “Create a playful and
accessible storytelling interface for children aged 5–8.” They
specify preferred goals and constraints in the “Design Goal”
field (e.g., “low reading level,” “visual-first interaction”) and tag
the style as “whimsical and exploratory.” The system uses this
input to generate a sequenced design pipeline, such as: (1) story
background, (2) onboarding interaction, (3) layout structure, (4)
navigation flow, (5) personalization options.
Next, the user moves to Panel B Design Reasoning Canvas,
where the pipeline is visualized as editable design nodes. Lin
inspects and refines the structure, adding a node for “multi-
sensory interaction” that was absent in the generated pipeline.
Each node can be annotated and expanded with subthreads of
exploration, creating a cognitive map of the evolving design
process.
When deeper reasoning is required—e.g., structuring “on-
boarding for non-readers”—Lin double-clicks the relevant node,
triggering Panel C LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer. The system
generates a multi-step LLM reasoning chain, with sugges-
tions such as “use audio prompts,” “add avatar-based guidance,”
and “progressive disclosure of functionality.” Lin evaluates, re-
orders, and revises steps, updating the underlying reasoning
graph.
Throughout the session, Lin iteratively switches between
panels, refining goals (Panel A), restructuring the conceptual
map (Panel B), and interrogating or editing LLM outputs (Panel
C). This dynamic interplay fosters not only idea generation
but also reflection, traceability, and cognitive alignment across
the design process.
4.3
System Implementation
We implement the DesignerlyLoop as node-based application,
technical framework is illustrated in Figure 6. The critical in-
formation regarding design process and its associated LLM
reasoning chains are stored as node-based graph data struc-
ture in the frontend. This approach provides a powerful model
that both frontend and backend can take advantage of. For
frontend, the graph serves as an intuitive visual representa-
tion that directly supports non-linear design evolution and
supports complex design trajectories, giving users the free-
dom to explore multiple creative directions simultaneously
without losing design context. And while the frontend pro-
vides an intuitive interface, the true power of DesignerlyLoop
lies in the backend’s ability to process the graph-based design
data. Specifically, backend is implemented to go beyond simple

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Figure 6: Technical framework of DesignerlyLoop, indicating interaction workflow includes three main steps: (1)
mapping design process to customized node-linked diagram via inputting design context, (2) curating design reasoning
and (3) co-creation process in the LLM reasoning chain.
nodes and edges and extract complex correlations between
different design elements and LLM outputs, providing deeper
insights and enabling more powerful automated processes.
4.3.1
Backend implement. The core of the backend in Design-
erlyLoop is a set of LLM-empowered API calls. The implemen-
tation mainly involves context management, reasoning mode
classification, dynamic prompt templates, and the generation
of AI-driven design processes and LLM reasoning chains. This
architecture enables an adaptive workflow that transcends
simple query-response, allowing the system to handle the
complex, non-linear nature of creative design. The two pri-
mary functionalities of backend design are the design process
generation and the LLM reasoning chain generation.
Design Process Generation. Design process generation fo-
cuses on transforming a user’s abstract design goal into a
concrete, executable design pipeline. We employ two separate
LLM API calls to generate design plans based on given de-
sign goal and design background and later fulfill the concrete
content of each design step. In prompt design of the first gen-
eration, the LLM acts as a "Project Architect" and structures a
list of high-level design steps (e.g., "User Research," "Concept
Ideation," "Prototyping"). Then, the dynamic prompt templates
are used to guide the LLM’s later generation process. To popu-
late each step with detailed content, the DesignerlyLoop system
provide LLM with the context of previously completed steps
along with semantically similar “golden examples” retrieved
from a case study library. These "golden examples" are essen-
tially high-quality few-shot prompting, which helps the LLM
to understand the pattern of the desired output, significantly
improving both the quality and consistency of its generations.
By injecting both the project’s evolving context and relevant
examples into the prompt, the system ensures the design pro-
cess generation is logical and coherent.
The DesignerlyLoop system uses “design reasoning canvas”
to complete focused exploration of a specific design problem.
Its core function is to generate a structured, multi-step “LLM
thinking chain" along with rationales that guide the user’s
creative process. The generation process is two-staged. In the
first phase, the system uses an LLM-powered classifier to an-
alyze the user’s goal and categorize it into one or two core
reasoning modes from a predefined set (i.e., Inductive, Deduc-
tive, Abductive, and Analogical) (Appendix A.3.1). This step
ensures the generated thought path is logically aligned with
the user’s specific problem-solving needs. Each combination
of reasoning mode enables a dynamic prompt template that
group corresponding methodology and few-shot examples
along with the user’s goal and the structured context for LLM
to demonstrate the ideal thought process. This directs the LLM
to generate a coherent, multi-step thinking chain.
In the final stage, the system first classifies each thinking
chain step into a specific design phase in double-diamond
model [77] (e.g., Discover_Divergent, Develop_Convergent)
to ensure purpose-driven content (Appendix A.3.2). It then
produces detailed rationales by providing the LLM with a rich
context of prior nonlinear nodes and relevant examples. The
detailed implementation is discussed in Section 4.3.2.
4.3.2
System Implementation. The DesignerlyLoop system is
implemented as a web-based application, where the frontend
is built with Vue 3 1 in JavaScript, and the backend is devel-
oped in Python using the FastAPI framework. Specifically, we
utilize the Vue Flow 2 as the very foundation for frontend
interface. And for backend, it is implemented using FastAPI 3
framework, with Uvicorn as the server. We use LangChain 4 to
1https://vuejs.org/
2https://vueflow.dev/
3https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/
4https://www.langchain.com/

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
build the whole pipeline of API-based LLM service, integrat-
ing the gpt-4o model and the text-embedding-ada-002 model
through Microsoft Azure OpenAI together with ChromaDB 5.
5
User Study
To validate the effectiveness of curated reasoning scaffolds in
DesignerlyLoop in supporting human–AI collaborative design
intention, we conducted a within-subjects experiment with
20 professional designers comparing it to a baseline system.
The study examined whether DesignerlyLoop enhances design-
ers’ ability to articulate, refine, and reflect on evolving design
intentions relative to traditional AI-assisted tools.
5.1
Participants
We recruited 20 professional designers with experience in
LLM-assisted design and balanced expertise in industrial and
art design (Appendix Table 1). Participants were recruited
through purposive sampling via posts on social media plat-
forms (Xiaohongshu, Weibo) and professional online design
communities (Xiaohongshu, Wechat), targeting individuals
with prior experience using LLMs. Screening collected (1) de-
mographics (age, gender, profession), (2) design experience
(duration, field), and (3) GenAI tool experience (types, use
cases). Only participants meeting the balanced background
criteria were included. Participants received $22 USD for a
120-minute session. The study received approval from the
university’s Institutional Review Board (IRB).
5.2
Study Design
5.2.1
Goal and Method. We conducted a within-subjects study
with 20 designers, each completing two conceptual design
tasks using DesignerlyLoop and a baseline system. The com-
parison isolates the contribution of curated reasoning—by
holding representational diagramming format and generative
AI capability.
5.2.2
Baseline System. The baseline served as a control con-
dition representing a standard AI-assisted diagramming tool.
It was a simplified version of DesignerlyLoop, retaining only
the essential components for node-link diagramming and ba-
sic AI generation. Specifically, the baseline preserved Panel
A (design node canvas) and Panel B (AI node generation),
enabling participants to construct and connect conceptual
elements while receiving direct AI suggestions through the
same underlying LLM. To isolate the effects of curated reason-
ing and co-creation mechanism, the baseline excluded Panel
C—the “LLM reasoning” panel—along with mechanisms for
design-intent articulation, and co-creation mechanisms. These
features in DesignerlyLoop were purposefully designed to scaf-
fold reasoning rather than expand functional capacity. Thus,
both systems offered equivalent generative capabilities and
interaction flow, differing only in the presence of reflection-
and reasoning-oriented scaffolds.
5https://docs.trychroma.com/
5.2.3
Study Design. The independent variable was the system
used (DesignerlyLoop vs. baseline). Dependent variables in-
cluded (1) self-reported SUS (System Usability Scale), (2) AI in-
teraction experience (controllability, collaboration, trust, cog-
nitive load, and enjoyment), (3) agency (artists’ self-confidence,
AI reliance), (4) creativity support (via the Creativity Support
Index), and (5) participants’ creative design quality.
5.3
Procedure
5.3.1
Introduction. Participants signed an informed consent
and were introduced to the study context and procedure (as
shown in Figure 7). Subsequently, participants watched the
tutorial slides with examples for either DesignerlyLoop or the
baseline system, then lets the participant explore (10 min).
5.3.2
Design Tasks. For each of the two tasks, participants
completed a 30-minute design session using both systems.
They created a node-linked diagram with 5–10 design steps
narrating the main design intent, selecting from six design
problems (Appendix B.2). To counterbalance potential task
bias, half of participants started with the baseline system and
half with DesignerlyLoop (Figure 7). To diminish biases re-
lated to personal preferences or familiarity for the external
evaluation of responses, we ask each participant to use the
same topic and concept group for each pair of DesignerlyLoop-
Baseline conditions. To minimize interference between two de-
sign sessions, there is a 20-minute break between the two tasks.
Think-aloud protocols were encouraged during the tasks.
5.3.3
Post-Study Feedback. Participants completed question-
naires and semi-structured interviews over 20 minutes. In-
terviews addressed the following five aspects: (1) usages and
experience on design processes using DesignerlyLoop and base-
line; (2) differences between these two LLM tools, focusing on
aspects such as creative stimulation, collaboration experience,
and AI performances; (3) evaluation of DesignerlyLoop’s fea-
tures (curate reasoning; user intent; customized iteration using
graph); (4) challenges encountered and impressive moments
when using DesignerlyLoop; and (5) participants’ willingness
in using DesignerlyLoop for conceptual design in the future,
along with suggestions for improvement.
Last, participants were asked to complete self-report ques-
tionnaires in five minutes using a 7-point Likert scale [50], to
evaluate their design processes with AI. These included the
Creativity Support Index (CSI) questionnaire [17], a question-
naire assessing overall human-AI interaction experience (i.e.,
controllable, transparent, cognitive load, collaboration, trust)
(Appendix B.3, Table 2), and a scale reporting designers’ confi-
dence and reliance (Appendix B.4). Participants also rated their
creative design outcomes based on two metrics: novelty (𝑁)
and usefulness (𝑈) (Appendix B.4). Additionally, participants
were asked to articulate their design concepts and describe
outcomes for both tasks in a structured form, in preparation
for subsequent expert evaluation using the same assessment
criteria as self-rated outcome (Section 6.3.2).

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Figure 7: User study procedure for the design task comparing DesignerlyLoop and the baseline system.
5.4
Data Analysis
Quantitative comparisons within participants began with Shapiro–Wilk
tests for normality. Normally distributed differences were an-
alyzed using paired-sample t-tests, non-normal differences
with Wilcoxon signed-rank tests. Pearson correlations were
used for normally distributed data and Spearman correlations
when assumptions were unmet. Expert ratings were assessed
for inter-rater consistency using Kendall’s W test [51] (Sec-
tion B.5.2).
Qualitative interview data were thematically coded using
an inductive–deductive approach [28] to complement and ex-
plain the quantitative findings. First, all audio recordings were
transcribed verbatim and verified for accuracy. Identifying
information was removed, and each transcript was assigned
a pseudonym. Transcripts, along with captured interaction
logs and screenshots, were imported into NVivo to facilitate
systematic coding and maintain an audit trail.
Second, two researchers independently conducted line-by-
line open (inductive) coding [92] on an initial purposively
selected subset of data designed to maximize variation in par-
ticipant background and usage patterns. During this stage,
coders documented analytic memos capturing emergent ideas,
questions, and provisional interpretations. Third, the coders
met regularly to compare codes, resolve discrepancies through
discussion, and iteratively construct a shared codebook [60].
Each code entry included a concise label, a clear definition,
inclusion/exclusion criteria, and exemplar quotations or in-
teraction snippets. Successive drafts of the codebook were
versioned and retroactively applied to earlier transcripts when
new codes were added. Interrater agreement was assessed on
a sample of transcripts using percent agreement and Cohen’s
𝜅[61], with remaining disagreements resolved through con-
sensus discussion. Finally, the finalized codebook was applied
deductively to the remaining dataset. Codes were clustered
into higher-level themes and subthemes through collaborative
mapping sessions. The resulting main themes and subthemes,
reflecting user benefits, human–AI collaboration experiences,
and creative outcomes, are reported in Section 6, accompanied
by representative quotations and, where appropriate, counts
of coded instances.
6
Findings
6.1
Benefits of the System
6.1.1
Support for Constructing Design Intent with High Usabil-
ity. According to the SUS standard, both DesignerlyLoop (𝑀𝐷𝐿=
77.6, 𝑆𝐷𝐷𝐿= 13.0) achieved usability score above the ac-
ceptance threshold of 70-“Good” level, the baseline system
(𝑀𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒= 69, 𝑆𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒= 19.1)’s score achieved the “OK”
level. The difference was significant, 𝑡(19) = 2.34, 𝑝= .030*.
Quantitative results reveal the underlying reasons: all par-
ticipants highlighted the tool’s capacity to scaffold the con-
struction and refinement of design intent through its unique
integration of design nodes, AI nodes, and the LLM reasoning
chain. The initial design nodes generated from the design con-
text provided a flexible yet structured starting point for their
ideation process. For example, P4 noted, “When I first saw
the keywords in the entire pipeline, I thought about whether
this matches the process I had in mind,” while P6 described
the pipeline as “giving me directions I hadn’t thought of before,
which I later added back into my design.” Additionally, “It can
serve as a positioning anchor point to help me review the overall
picture, recall my initial goal, and check the steps that were not
considered” (P8). Participants further described how the added
AI nodes and design nodes enabled them to customize this ini-
tial structure to better reflect their evolving understanding and
priorities. P2 stated, “The AI-generated outputs (on AI nodes)
inspired me, and I usually revise it into my own wording,” and
P7 added, “I don’t fully rely on the AI; I add my own nodes to
organize the ideas in my mind.” This interplay between AI-
generated outputs and user curation was seen as essential for
articulating and expressing nuanced design ideas. Crucially,

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
most participants identified the LLM reasoning chain as a core
feature supporting an iterative loop of reasoning, reflection,
and refinement. P1 explained, “When I think on my own, my
thoughts tend to jump around, but the chain helps me clarify how
the logic flows between steps,” and P11 reflected, “This reasoning
chain process actually lets me go back and confirm whether my
intent holds up.” The ability to iteratively manipulate the LLM
reasoning chain, while simultaneously organizing ideas via
layered nodes, was reported to foster deeper engagement with
design problems and clearer intent formation. Together, these
features facilitated situated, iterative, and curated reasoning
processes that helped participants externalize and evolve their
design intent throughout the workflow.
6.1.2
Supporting Reflecting and Articulating Reasoning Struc-
ture. Participants emphasized how the system’s integration
of LLM reasoning chain within each design node allowed them
not only to access richer outputs but to reflect on the
AI’s underlying reasoning process. This capacity to surface
the “thought process” behind the AI-generated outputs helped
participants critically assess and modify the AI’s logic. All par-
ticipants described, “I became more willing to adjust its outputs
because I could see how it thought about the problem through
four steps.” (P9) Similarly, P5 noted that this reasoning process
was more transparent than in one-shot AI-generated outputs,
stating, “When I click in, I can see the logic unfold—that gives
me confidence and helps me spot where to revise.” Participants
saw the customized structure of each LLM reasoning chain as
essential for supporting reflective reasoning and maintaining
coherence across iterations. The combination of the LLM’s
multi-step reasoning and the user’s ability to inspect and in-
tervene at each step helped solidify internal logic and surface
latent assumptions. These reflective practices were described
as key to enhancing both individual understanding and the
quality of AI-assisted design decisions.
6.1.3
Supporting Diverse and Non-linear Intent Understanding
Paths. This support is scaffolded by features in customized
structure and iterative loop. Based on the use of design nodes,
AI nodes, and LLM chain nodes, this system enabled non-linear
exploration through the design process rather than adher-
ing to a fixed linear structure. While the design nodes offered
an initial flow, participants frequently added design nodes to
branch off into alternative directions or revisit earlier steps.
P3 described this flexibility as “more seamless than task a,”
highlighting how they could “regenerate or deepen” questions
without restarting the conversation. P9 further articulated how
this non-linear organization mirrored the actual rhythms of
creative work: “Sometimes I go back and add a step 2.1 or 1.2
because a new idea comes up—it’s not just a straight line.” This
capacity to remix and restructure idea development was also
seen as enabling deeper exploration of concepts. As P12 re-
flected, “The whole process didn’t feel rigid—when my thinking
shifted, the system let me shift, too.” Rather than locking partic-
ipants into a pre-defined sequence, the system’s support for
flexible, recursive iterative loop and reorganization of nodes
was central to enabling diverse paths toward clarifying design
intent.
6.2
Human-AI Interaction and
Collaboration Experience
6.2.1
Overall Human-AI Interaction Experience. Self-reported
ratings of overall human-AI interaction experience revealed
that DesignerlyLoop received better evaluations across all five
dimensions (as shown in Table 3) (Figure 8a). Paired-sample
t-tests revealed significant increases in perceived Controlla-
bility (𝑀𝐷𝐿= 2.70, 𝑡(19) = 3.65, 𝑝= .002**), Collaboration
(𝑀𝐷𝐿= 2.60, 𝑡(19) = 2.80, 𝑝= .012**), and Cognitive Load
(𝑀𝐷𝐿= 2.40, 𝑡(19) = −1.76, 𝑝= .094) in DesignerlyLoop com-
pared to baseline. The Wilcoxon signed-rank tests showed a
significant difference between the two tasks in Transparent
(𝑉= 135, 𝑝= .006**), and Trust (𝑉= 136, 𝑝< .001***) (Ta-
ble 3), indicating that the interface change had a significant
impact on participants’ perceptions of transparency, cognitive
effort, and trust.
The qualitative analysis results showed participants con-
sistently reported that the DesignerlyLoop system offered en-
hanced controllability during the design process, especially
when engaging with the LLM reasoning chain through iterative
loop to construct the reasoning process. As P3 described, “I
could deepen the question without retyping it each time... De-
signerlyLoop lets me quickly regenerate or remove unwanted
ideas, which keeps my thinking more cohesive.” AI node also
provide cognitively-intensive collaboration in iteration and
exploration, by “frequently think about and make use of prompt
words for communication” (P18). Overall, this controllability
derive from precise configuration of design pipeline and AI
nodes, and flexible on-the-fly refinement of flexible interaction
with AI nodes (Controllability). Collaboration with the AI was
perceived as more reciprocal in the DesignerlyLoop system.
Several participants described task a as “directive,” while task
b fostered a more “co-creative” relationship. P5 remarked, “In
baseline task, the AI is more like a colleague—we think together
and refine each other’s inputs through the LLM reasoning chain.”
The visualized pipeline structure reinforced shared problem-
solving rhythms and a sense that “both sides are thinking si-
multaneously,” as P20 stated, “I constantly reviewing whether its
thinking chain and outputs are consistent with what I imagined,
then determine if I adjust them” (Collaboration). Participants
found task b more transparent due to the explicit representa-
tion of the LLM reasoning chain. This made them “more willing
to adjust AI-generated outputs” and supported reflective, in-
tentional decisions (Transparent). While initial AI-generated
outputs were mixed, all participants eventually found the mod-
ular structure helpful. As one noted, “Once familiar, it’s much
easier to adjust one part of the idea without redoing everything.”
The segmented reasoning process aided complexity manage-
ment (Cognitive Load). The ability to trace idea evolution in
the pipeline fostered trust. P5 said, “With the LLM reasoning
chain showing step-by-step thinking, I know where each idea

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8: Comparison between DesignerlyLoop (Task 1) and the baseline (Task 2) across (a) overall AI interaction
experience metrics, (b) CSI metrics, and (c) design quality scores across participants and expert evaluations.
Figure 9: CSI questionnaire results (-: 𝑝> .05, *: 𝑝< .05,
**: 𝑝< .01, ***: 𝑝< .001)
comes from—it’s not random.” During this process, participants
first read then determine add, revise, or delete, “The process of
deleting AI-generated outputs is also the process of understand-
ing them” (P20). This implies participants “understanding” and
“internalizing” the AI-generated outputs instead of merely us-
ing them during co-creation process (Trust).
6.3
Creativity Supported Design Outcomes
6.3.1
Creativity Supports. For the design process, the CSI re-
sults indicated that DesignerlyLoop (𝑀𝐷𝐿= 95.2, 𝑆𝐷𝐷𝐿= 12.4)
significantly enhanced creativity compared to the baseline
system (𝑀𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒= 78.7, 𝑆𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒= 17.9), with a p-value of
𝑝< .001***. This demonstrates DesignerlyLoop’s impact on
fostering creativity over the baseline system. Paired 𝑡-tests
and Wilcoxon singed-rank tests revealed significant improve-
ments were observed in five out of six factors after correction
(as shown in Figure 9) (Figure 8b): Collaboration (𝑀𝐷𝐿= 3.1,
𝑡(19) = 3.78, 𝑝= .0013**), Enjoyment (𝑀𝐷𝐿= 3.7, 𝑉= 164,
𝑝< .001**), Exploration (𝑀𝐷𝐿= 3.4, 𝑡(19) = 4.25, 𝑝< .001***),
Expressiveness (𝑀𝐷𝐿= 2.7, 𝑡(19) = 4.70, 𝑝< .001***) and Im-
mersion (𝑀𝐷𝐿= 1.9, 𝑡(19) = 2.65, 𝑝= 0.0159*). The difference
in Worth Effort was marginal (𝑀= 1.8, 𝑉= 116, 𝑝= .0067).
Interview analysis indicated that the significant increases
in creativity supports were closely tied to the system’s abil-
ity to support curated reasoning at both the design process
and LLM reasoning chain levels. P4 described the ability to
quickly iterate through design nodes and receive coherent out-
puts from the LLM chain (node) as “surprisingly smooth and
coherent” (Collaboration). The customized structure, combined
with iterative loop support, was frequently associated with
heightened enjoyment; P19 appreciated “the AI generating de-
tailed inspiring new design concepts,” and P13 valued being
able to “explore many novel ideas following my train of thought”
and export them to the external canvas, making the process
more rewarding (Enjoyment). Exploration benefits arose from
the system’s facilitation of branching and sub-goal genera-
tion through curated reasoning. P12 noted, “I clicked into each
sticky note... and continued to develop detailed steps,” demon-
strating how iterative loop navigation within design nodes
encouraged non-linear ideation between AI nodes and new
nodes (Exploration). For Expressiveness, the LLM chain (node)
helped articulate abstract or latent ideas with adaptive granu-
larity. As P16 remarked, “reasoning chain changes as the level
of detail of the user’s input prompt varies, which was a pleasant
surprise”, illustrating how the customized structure scaffolded
communication of nuanced concepts (Expressiveness). Immer-
sion improvements were linked to seamless information flow
across design nodes and AI nodes, allowing designers to re-
main embedded in their creative trajectory without frequent
context-switching. P13 observed that “the information flow
was better connected” in the enhanced version, enabling cu-
rated reasoning to sustain narrative continuity across iterative
loops (Immersion). While Worth the Effort did not reach the
highest significance, participants acknowledged that refined
ideas generated via AI nodes and structured design nodes jus-
tified the effort. P15 stated they could “refine their ideas via
more AI generation with structure supports,” though some, like
P13, cautioned against “too many parallel and dispersion points”
when tasks required direct convergence rather than dispersed
sub-goals (Worth the Effort).
6.3.2
Self and Expert Rating Evaluation. Participants created
40 pairs of DesignerlyLoop-Baseline-conditioned design (i.e.,
each pair with the same topic and design question; diverse

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
across design solutions and intent. Self-assessment and expert
rating results demonstrated the design outcomes Designerly-
Loop is better than baseline system (Figure 8c) (Table 5 and
6). In self-assessment, the DesignerlyLoop system significantly
outperformed baseline on all 𝑁(𝑝= .001**), 𝑈(𝑝< .001***),
and𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦measures (𝑝= .001**). In expert rating, the Design-
erlyLoop system still outperformed baseline on 𝑈(𝑝= .004**),
and 𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑝= .006**), but the difference was marginal
significance on 𝑁(𝑝= .058). The DesignerlyLoop system sig-
nificantly increased users’ self-efficacy and self-reported in-
novativeness, as well as the usefulness and design quality of
both self-reported and expert assessments. Users generally
perceived the ideas they generated as more novel and valuable
after using DesignerlyLoop.
Qualitative analysis of participant interviews revealed sev-
eral underlying mechanisms behind the observed improve-
ments in creativity and output quality. Users generally per-
ceived the ideas they generated as more novel and valuable
after using DesignerlyLoop. First, the iterative expansion sup-
ported in DesignerlyLoop system allowed participants to re-
fine, branch, and enrich initial outputs while preserving con-
textual continuity. As P12 said, “this process encouraged sys-
tematic comparison of alternatives and fostered deeper explo-
ration,” leading to more polished outcomes. Second, “some
AI-generated outputs proactively incorporated multi-perspective
considerations,” through a explicit prompt with exploratory
goals, which “broadened users’ design scope and inclusivity”
meanwhile “helped users clarify their thoughts and reflect on
further decisions.” Overall, the curated reasoning process al-
lowed designers to feel like they were in charge of the design
process, thus increasing their self-confidence.
6.4
User Perception with Design Outcomes
and Tool Experience
6.4.1
Cognitive Augmentation and Process-Driven Design Qual-
ity.
Our quantitative and qualitative findings revealed that the
correlation between AI interaction, reliance and design out-
comes exhibited a diminishing trend within DesignerlyLoop
(Figure 10) (Appendix, Table 8) (Appendix, Table 7). Coupled
with improvements across variables in DesignerlyLoop, this
demonstrated that baseline outcomes were highly dependent
on individual AI interaction experience and proficiency. How-
ever, DesignerlyLoop mitigated this dependency, supported in-
ternal cognitive scaffolding, enabling consistent enhancements
in design outcomes. We elaborated these patterns underlying
the following causes:
First, structured AI support via multi-stage thinking nodes
provided systematic guidance and process intervention, re-
inforcing cognitive strategies and task decomposition. This
enabled users to achieve higher-quality designs independent
of immediate subjective experience. Second, increased cog-
nitive load from the DesignerlyLoop system’s complex multi-
node interface decoupled instant experience from outcome
metrics, yet promoted deeper reflection, iterative refinement,
and ultimately higher design quality. Third, users exhibited a
shift toward systemic, reflective design thinking, moving
from intuition-driven approaches to more structured, critical
strategies, further enhancing novelty and usefulness.
6.4.2
Psychological Drivers of Task Load and Usability Percep-
tion. Behavioral observations revealed distinct psychological
mechanisms governing task performance and system eval-
uation across interface conditions. These patterns provide
explanatory context for correlational findings.
Within the high-complexity DesignerlyLoop system, task
load management and emotional regulation were governed
by perceived agency and process control. Participants who
developed systematic interaction strategies—such as dimen-
sional filtering or progressive refinement—exhibited reduced
frustration and enhanced performance. These individuals fre-
quently articulated analytical approaches, indicating conscious
load management. Conversely, participants struggling to estab-
lish system mental models demonstrated cognitive overload
through hesitation, repetitive actions, and confusion. Their
usability assessments emphasized analytical process difficulty
over interface aesthetics.
The low-complexity baseline system exhibited contrasting
behavioral patterns. Engagement and immediate positive ex-
perience dominated task execution and system perception.
Participants demonstrating exploratory behavior or express-
ing enjoyment through unsolicited positive feedback reported
lower workload and higher usability scores. Their interac-
tions reflected fluid confidence rather than deliberate caution.
Notably, these participants seldom referenced control or cogni-
tive load unless prompted, instead emphasizing visualization
engagement and discovery satisfaction.
Cross-system analysis confirmed cognitive load manage-
ment as critical to performance and usability assessments. Par-
ticipants employing effective mental demand reduction strate-
gies achieved superior outcomes regardless of system complex-
ity. Enjoyment expressions consistently predicted favorable
evaluations. While controllability’s influence was attenuated
in aggregate analysis, its distinctive role in high-complexity
environments remained evident through participant strategies.
7
Discussion
Building on prior human–AI collaborative systems empha-
sizing structured interaction (e.g., [16, 83, 109]), our work ad-
dresses the gap in supporting designers’ nonlinear, exploratory
reasoning and reflective engagement during multi-turn hu-
man–AI co-creation. Through a within-subject study with
20 designers, we found that DesignerlyLoop enhanced reflec-
tive engagement, iterative refinement, and multi-dimensional
integration of design intentions (Section 6.1, 6.2, 6.3) We high-
light three main novelties in human-AI collaboration: explicit
structuring reasoning, and shaping evaluation loop from both
design and AI level (Section 7.1), as well as illuminating affec-
tive and cognitive pathways to usability and creative outcomes
(Section 7.2).

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: (a) Distribution of self-confidence (Agency1) and AI reliance (Agency2), and (b) correlation between self-rated
design outcomes with self-confidence and AI reliance, showing baseline (Task A) vs. DesignerlyLoop (Task B).
7.1
Structuring Reasoning and Dynamic
Curating in Human–AI Collaboration
Design
Prior work highlights that designers often rely on intuition
and tacit experience rather than explicit methodological adher-
ence [64, 99]. While efficient, this strategy risks opportunistic
ideation [21, 102] and loss of conceptual coherence in com-
plex tasks. Firstly, this externalizing structure represents a
fundamental cognitive role shift. Designers inspect and
curate the AI’s reasoning frameworks to ensure align-
ment with their own intent. This shift—from “dialogue with
AI” to “architecting reasoning with AI”—encouraged partici-
pants to critically filter, reconfigure, and embed AI reasoning
into their workflows. This process deepened reflective engage-
ment and supported systematic, personalized design practices.
To this regard, our work consistent with distributed cognition
and external representation studies [37, 42, 115]. This studies
emphasized that cognitive work can be offloaded onto struc-
tured artifacts, allowing users to redirect resources toward
higher-level reasoning. In such interaction, AI-generated com-
plex reasoning structures play a role similar to that of “cogni-
tive scaffolding.” Secondly, our findings show that human–AI
collaboration introduces an external mechanism for dy-
namically regulating reasoning. Designers were able to
flexibly shift between implicit and explicit modes, balancing
opportunistic exploration with systematic interaction.
As P16 explained, “the degree of detail (structure representa-
tion) varied as I input” (Section 6.3.1). This interplay between
explicit and implicit reasoning reveals a novel insight: by exter-
nalizing reasoning structures, designers gain selective control
over transparency and agency, extending prior systems where
reasoning methods remained opaque (e.g., [16]).
Compared to prior “turn-taking” [83] and “implicit inte-
gration” approaches on exchanging or merging ideas [16],
our findings highlight a deeper form of collaboration: hu-
mans and AI jointly maintaining and evolving reason-
ing structures, with flexible and dynamic features. This
dynamic cycle of curation and reflection, where mirrored rea-
soning structures on both sides cultivate systematic and inten-
tional creativity, underscores a transferable design principle.
Importantly, effective collaboration is not about producing
more collaborative ideas but about providing designers with
composable and controllable reasoning structures that
adapt across diverse contexts, sustaining both agency and
high-quality outcomes.
7.2
Affective and Cognitive Pathways to
Usability and Creative Outcomes in
Human-AI Collaborative Design
Our findings reveal a dynamic moderating relationship be-
tween user experience and design outcomes in human-AI
collaborative design. In structured, multi-node systems,
reflective and strategy-oriented engagement alongside
effective cognitive load management drive high-quality
design. Such complex interactions transform the simple cor-
relation between subjective enjoyment, usability (SUS) (Sec-
tion 6.4.2), and final design quality (Section 6.4.1). Specifically,
in low-complexity baseline systems, subjective experience
metrics such as enjoyment and exploration positively corre-
late with both SUS ratings (Section 6.4.2) and task outcomes
(Section 6.4.1). This suggests that affect-driven engagement
in simple interactions directly supports usability and design
performance. However, with increasing system complexity, as
in the DesignerlyLoop system, this relationship changes fun-
damentally. SUS scores become strongly associated with user
controllability and tool transparency, and negatively corre-
lated with cognitive load (Section 6.4.2), while pleasure and
immediate explorability are no longer reliable predictors of
design outcomes (Section 6.4.1). Qualitative evidence rein-
forces this interpretation: the underlying mechanism lies in

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
the interplay of system complexity, process transparency, and
user control. As complexity increases, users must deliberately
allocate cognitive resources and coordinate AI guidance, shift-
ing engagement from affective to strategic. Taken together,
these results demonstrate that in complex AI systems, affec-
tive and cognitive drivers operate through partially orthogonal
mechanisms: positive emotions underpin usability in baseline
systems, whereas structured control and cognitive scaffolding
drive performance under complexity.
Our findings resonate with, yet critically extend prior lit-
erature cautioning that high cognitive load can foster com-
placency or overreliance [70, 89], thereby reducing critical en-
gagement. However, our results complicate this view. Glinka
et al. [34] argue that “misalignment” between AI and user per-
spectives can foster productive reflection if users consciously
engage with the output. Similarly, we show that externaliz-
ing multi-node reasoning structures means that increased
cognitive load does not render users passive but instead
necessitates orchestration and reflective oversight. This
suggests that higher cognitive demands, when paired with
transparency and controllability, promote strategic rather than
undermining engagement, with active review and critique
tools at the core.
7.3
Design Implications
7.3.1
Structuring AI as Cognitive Scaffolds with Pro-
gressive Disclosure. Our integrated findings suggest that
multi-node AI collaboration and staged reasoning prompts
function not merely as creative generators, but as cognitive
scaffolds shaping both perceived usability and design outcomes.
In complex systems, affective engagement alone is insufficient;
high-quality outcomes rely on reflective, strategy-oriented
engagement supported by controllable AI structures. Future
HCI systems for creative design should embed AI within lay-
ered, user-controllable scaffolds that guide task decomposition,
iterative exploration, and decision-making, rather than only
producing immediate outputs. To operationalize this, systems
can leverage progressive disclosure of AI functionality, dynam-
ically adjusting node quantity, task complexity, and feature
exposure according to real-time cognitive load and interac-
tion context. This approach balances structured intervention
with user autonomy, aligns with reflective practice and scaf-
folding theories [18, 101, 106], and ensures users remain both
empowered and cognitively supported throughout the design
process.
7.3.2
Embracing Complexity to Foster Reflective and Strate-
gic Creativity. In high-complexity AI collaboration, increased
cognitive load weakens direct correlations between enjoy-
ment or exploration and design outcomes, yet simultaneously
fosters reflective thinking and iterative improvement. Future
HCI systems in such high-complexity AI collaboration tasks
should should intentionally embrace structured complexity and
multi-round AI interactions to cultivate critical, systemic, and
strategy-oriented design thinking, rather than prioritizing sim-
plicity or transient satisfaction [25, 66]. The key design chal-
lenge is to transform cognitive load into a driver of creativity
by providing progressive task structuring, transparent control
mechanisms, and reflection-oriented prompts, while carefully
mitigating user fatigue and frustration.
7.4
Limitation and Future Work
Several limitations should be noted. First, our evaluation tasks
focused on design scenarios that benefit from iterative reason-
ing and multi-node AI interaction, which may not generalize to
domains where tasks are more constrained or require minimal
reasoning, such as simple layout adjustments or single-step
content generation. Future work could explore the applicabil-
ity of DesignerlyLoop across diverse design domains and task
types. Second, our user study was conducted in controlled,
short-term sessions. Participants’ engagement with cognitive
scaffolds and reasoning nodes might differ over prolonged
or repeated use, where factors such as cognitive fatigue or
learning effects could emerge. Third, the current design of
reasoning nodes and prompt chaining was informed by the-
ory and prior literature on cognitive scaffolding, but its op-
timal configuration remains unexplored. Future work could
investigate adaptive or personalized node arrangements that
dynamically adjust complexity, guidance, and feedback based
on user expertise or task difficulty.
8
Conclusion
Our study demonstrates that embedding LLMs as structured,
interactive reasoning process within a visual node-based inter-
face can significantly enhance human–AI co-creation. Design-
erlyLoop enables designers to systematically curate, test, and
iterate on AI-generated suggestions, fostering both higher-
quality design outcomes and deeper reflective engagement.
Importantly, improvements in creativity and design quality
arise not merely from immediate subjective experience but
from structured cognitive scaffolding, iterative reflection, and
deliberate management of cognitive load. These findings un-
derscore the value of designing AI tools not solely as content
generators but as dynamic collaborators that augment hu-
man reasoning, promote agency, and support critical, systemic
thinking. Future work should investigate scalable mechanisms
for adaptive scaffolding and personalized interaction to bal-
ance cognitive challenge, creative flow, and user autonomy in
complex design tasks.
9
Acknowledgment about the Use of LLM
The authors would like to acknowledge the use of the genera-
tive AI tool in this work. Specifically, GPT-4o mini by OpenAI
was utilized to: (1) assist in language refinement, including
grammar and style corrections of existing manuscript text,
(2) generate R code for data analysis based on our proposed
analytical procedures, and (3) generate LaTeX tables from

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
the analyzed data results. Moreover, GPT-4o model and text-
embedding-ada-002 model API service was used through Mi-
crosoft Azure interface during system implementation. All
interpretations, conclusions, and final content remain the re-
sponsibility of the authors.
References
[1] Douglas R. Anderson. 1986. The Evolution of Peirce’s Concept of Abduc-
tion. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 22, 2 (1986), 145–164.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40320131
[2] Tyler Angert, Miroslav Suzara, Jenny Han, Christopher Pondoc, and Har-
iharan Subramonyam. 2023. Spellburst: A Node-based Interface for Ex-
ploratory Creative Coding with Natural Language Prompts. In Proceedings
of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Tech-
nology. ACM, San Francisco CA USA, 1–22. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606719
TLDR: Spellburst provides a node-based interface that allows artists to cre-
ate generative art and explore variations through branching and merging
operations, expressive prompt-based interactions to engage in semantic
programming, and dynamic prompt-driven interfaces and direct code
editing to seamlessly switch between semantic and syntactic exploration..
[3] Asad Anjum, Yuting Li, Noelle Law, M Charity, and Julian Togelius. 2024.
The Ink Splotch Effect: A Case Study on ChatGPT as a Co-Creative
Game Designer. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on the
Foundations of Digital Games. ACM, Worcester MA USA, 1–15. doi:10.
1145/3649921.3650010
[4] Chris Argyris. 2002. Teaching Smart People How to Learn. Reflections:
The SoL Journal 4, 2 (Dec. 2002), 4–15. doi:10.1162/152417302762251291
[5] Anne Arzberger, Vera van der Burg, Senthil K. Chandrasegaran, and P.
Lloyd. 2022. Triggered: Using Human-AI Dialogue for Problem Under-
standing in Collaborative Design. In 34th International Conference on De-
sign Theory and Methodology (DTM). V006T06A006. doi:10.1115/detc2022-
89273
[6] Amir Reza Asadi. 2023. LLMs in Design Thinking: Autoethnographic
Insights and Design Implications. In 2023 The 5th World Symposium on
Software Engineering (WSSE). ACM, Tokyo Japan, 55–60. doi:10.1145/
3631991.3631999 TLDR: This autoethnographic approach provides a
unique perspective on the integration of LLMs in design thinking, shed-
ding light on their potentials as tools for innovation and fostering the
insights of their implications for design practitioners and UX researchers..
[7] Jeffrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, Peter Dalsgaard, Shad Gross, and Kim
Halskov. 2016. Documenting the Research Through Design Process. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems.
ACM, Brisbane QLD Australia, 96–107. doi:10.1145/2901790.2901859
TLDR: This work presents a framework for planning and evaluating
RtD documentation that addresses three core concerns: the medium of
documentation, the performativity of Documentation, and providing
equal support for both research and design..
[8] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006.
Using thematic analy-
sis in psychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (2006),
77–101. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa doi:10.1191/
1478088706qp063oa
[9] Meagan E. Brock, Andrew Vert, Vykinta Kligyte, Ethan P. Waples, Syd-
ney T. Sevier, and Michael D. Mumford. 2008. Mental Models: An Alterna-
tive Evaluation of a Sensemaking Approach to Ethics Instruction. Science
and Engineering Ethics 14, 3 (Sept. 2008), 449–472. doi:10.1007/s11948-008-
9076-3 TLDR: The study shows that sensemaking training has a potential
to induce shifts in researchers’ mental models by making them more
cognitively complex via the use of metacognitive reasoning strategies..
[10] Tim Brown et al. 2008. Design thinking. Harvard business review 86, 6
(2008), 84.
[11] Alice Cai, Steven R Rick, Jennifer L Heyman, Yanxia Zhang, Alexandre
Filipowicz, Matthew Hong, Matt Klenk, and Thomas Malone. 2023. Desig-
nAID: Using Generative AI and Semantic Diversity for Design Inspiration.
In Proceedings of The ACM Collective Intelligence Conference. ACM, Delft
Netherlands, 1–11. doi:10.1145/3582269.3615596 TLDR: DesignAID is
introduced, a generative AI tool that supports broader design space explo-
ration by first using large language models to produce a range of diverse
ideas expressed in words, and then using image generation software to
create images from these words..
[12] Runze Cai, Nuwan Janaka, Yang Chen, Lucia Wang, Shengdong Zhao, and
Can Liu. 2024. PANDALens: Towards AI-Assisted In-Context Writing on
OHMD During Travels. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–24. doi:10.1145/
3613904.3642320
[13] Linda Candy. 2020. The Creative Reflective Practitioner: Research Through
Making and Practice. Routledge, Abingdon, Oxon New York, NY.
[14] Baptiste Caramiaux and Sarah Fdili Alaoui. 2022. " Explorers of Unknown
Planets" Practices and Politics of Artificial Intelligence in Visual Arts.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, CSCW2 (2022),
1–24.
[15] John M. Carroll. 1995. Scenario-Based Design: Envisioning Work and
Technology in System Development. Wiley, New York, NY.
[16] Pei Chen, Jiayi Yao, Zhuoyi Cheng, Yichen Cai, Jiayang Li, Weitao You, and
Lingyun Sun. 2025. CoExploreDS: Framing and Advancing Collaborative
Design Space Exploration Between Human and AI. In Proceedings of
the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
Yokohama Japan, 1–20. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713869
[17] Erin Cherry and Celine Latulipe. 2014. Quantifying the creativity support
of digital tools through the creativity support index. ACM Trans. Comput.-
Hum. Interact. 21, 4 (June 2014). doi:10.1145/2617588 Number of pages:
25 Place: New York, NY, USA Publisher: Association for Computing
Machinery tex.articleno: 21 tex.issue_date: August 2014.
[18] Michelene T.H. Chi, Nicholas De Leeuw, Mei-Hung Chiu, and
Christian
Lavancher.
1994.
Eliciting
Self-Explanations
Im-
proves Understanding.
Cognitive Science 18, 3 (1994), 439–477.
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1207/s15516709cog1803_3
doi:https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog1803_3
[19] DaEun Choi, Sumin Hong, Jeongeon Park, John Joon Young Chung, and
Juho Kim. 2024. CreativeConnect: Supporting Reference Recombination
for Graphic Design Ideation with Generative AI. In Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Honolulu
HI USA, 1–25. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642794 TLDR: This work proposes
CreativeConnect, a system with generative AI pipelines that helps users
discover useful elements from the reference image using keywords, rec-
ommends relevant keywords, generates diverse recombination options
with user-selected keywords, and shows recombinations as sketches with
text descriptions..
[20] DaEun Choi, Kihoon Son, Hyunjoon Jung, and Juho Kim. 2025. Expandora:
Broadening Design Exploration with Text-to-Image Model. In Proceedings
of the ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
doi:10.1145/3706599.3720189
[21] Nigel Cross. 2004. Expertise in design: an overview. Design Studies 25, 5
(2004), 427–441. doi:10.1016/j.destud.2004.06.002 Expertise in Design.
[22] Zijian Ding, Michelle Brachman, Joel Chan, and Werner Geyer. 2025.
Structuring GenAI-assisted Hypotheses Exploration with an Interactive
Shared Representation. In Companion Proceedings of the 30th International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. ACM, Cagliari Italy, 167–171.
doi:10.1145/3708557.3716364 TLDR: An ordered node-link tree interface
augmented with AI-generated information hints and visualizations is
proposed, as a shared representation for hypothesis exploration, poten-
tially enhancing the breadth and depth of human-AI collaborative data
analysis..
[23] Kees Dorst and Nigel Cross. 2001. Problem solving in design. Design
Studies 22, 5 (2001), 425–437. doi:10.1016/S0142-694X(01)00009-6
[24] Stefania Druga and Nancy Otero. 2023. Scratch Copilot Evaluation: As-
sessing AI-Assisted Creative Coding for Families. http://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.10417 arXiv:2305.10417 [cs].
[25] K. Anders Ericsson, Neil Charness, Paul J. Feltovich, and Robert R. Hoff-
man. 2006. The Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance.
(2006).
[26] Sidong Feng, Mingyue Yuan, Jieshan Chen, Zhenchang Xing, and Chun-
yang Chen. 2023. Designing with Language: Wireframing UI Design
Intent with Generative Large Language Models. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2312.
07755 arXiv:2312.07755 [cs] TLDR: The effectiveness of WireGen is
demonstrated in producing 77.5% significantly better wireframes, outper-
forming two widely-used in-context learning baselines, and its potential
value to enhance UI design process is highlighted..
[27] Sidong Feng, Mingyue Yuan, Jieshan Chen, Zhenchang Xing, and Chun-
yang Chen. 2023. Designing with Language: Wireframing UI Design
Intent with Generative Large Language Models. arXiv:2312.07755 [cs.HC]
https://consensus.app/papers/designing-with-language-wireframing-
ui-design-intent-with-feng-yuan/0a1c1ffdc87c5d4d82dcd15596c59327/
?utm_source=chatgpt
[28] Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane. 2006.
Demon-
strating
Rigor
Using
Thematic
Analysis:
A
Hybrid
Approach
of
Inductive
and
Deductive
Coding
and
Theme
Develop-
ment.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 5, 1 (2006),
80–92.
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/160940690600500107
doi:10.1177/160940690600500107

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
[29] Corey Ford and Nick Bryan-Kinns. [n. d.]. On the Role of Reflection and
Digital Tool Design for Creative Practitioners. ([n. d.]).
[30] Corey Ford, Ashley Noel-Hirst, Sara Cardinale, Jackson Loth, Pedro
Sarmento, Elizabeth Wilson, Lewis Wolstanholme, Kyle Worrall, and
Nick Bryan-Kinns. 2024.
Reflection Across AI-based Music Compo-
sition. In Creativity and Cognition. ACM, Chicago IL USA, 398–412.
doi:10.1145/3635636.3656185
[31] Bill Gaver, Tony Dunne, and Elena Pacenti. 1999. Design: Cultural probes.
Interactions 6, 1 (1999), 21–29. doi:10.1145/291224.291235
[32] Xun Ge, Ching-Huei Chen, and Kendrick A. Davis. 2005. Scaffolding
Novice Instructional Designers’ Problem-Solving Processes Using Ques-
tion Prompts in a Web-Based Learning Environment. Journal of Educa-
tional Computing Research 33, 2 (Sept. 2005), 219–248. doi:10.2190/5F6J-
HHVF-2U2B-8T3G TLDR: The qualitative findings supported the pre-
vious research on the advantages of question prompts in scaffolding
ill-structured problem solving and shed light on the specific cognitive
and metacognitive functions, as well as limitations, of question Prompts
in different conditions..
[33] Katy Ilonka Gero, Chelse Swoopes, Ziwei Gu, Jonathan K. Kummerfeld,
and Elena L. Glassman. 2024. Supporting Sensemaking of Large Language
Model Outputs at Scale. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642139
[34] Katrin Glinka and Claudia Müller-Birn. 2023. Critical-Reflective Human-
AI Collaboration: Exploring Computational Tools for Art Historical Im-
age Retrieval. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7,
CSCW2 (Sept. 2023), 1–33. doi:10.1145/3610054 TLDR: A qualitative inter-
view study with art historians to explore what potentials and affordances
art historians ascribe to human-AI collaboration and CV in particular, and
in what ways art historians conceptualize critical reflection in the context
of human- AI collaboration found that critical reflection constitutes a
core prerequisite for ’meaningful’ human-ai collaboration in humanities
research contexts..
[35] John R. Hayes. 1996. A new framework for understanding cognition and
affect in writing. In The science of writing: Theories, methods, individual
differences, and applications. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, 1–27.
[36] Jessica He, Stephanie Houde, Gabriel E. Gonzalez, Darío Andrés
Silva Moran, Steven I. Ross, Michael Muller, and Justin D. Weisz. 2024. AI
and the Future of Collaborative Work: Group Ideation with an LLM in a
Virtual Canvas. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Meeting of the Symposium
on Human-Computer Interaction for Work. ACM, Newcastle upon Tyne
United Kingdom, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3663384.3663398 TLDR: A user study
with 17 professionals experienced with virtual group ideation workshops
found value in using generative AI to assist with group facilitation and
to augment perspectives and ideas, but also worried about losing human
perspectives and critical thinking, as well as reputational harms resulting
from harmful AI outputs..
[37] James Hollan, Edwin Hutchins, and David Kirsh. 2000. Distributed cog-
nition: toward a new foundation for human-computer interaction re-
search. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 7, 2 (June 2000), 174–196.
doi:10.1145/353485.353487
[38] Ari Holtzman, Peter West, Vered Shwartz, Yejin Choi, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2021. Surface Form Competition: Why the Highest Probabil-
ity Answer Isn’t Always Right. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Repub-
lic, 7038–7051. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.564 TLDR: Domain
Conditional Pointwise Mutual Information is introduced, an alternative
scoring function that directly compensates for surface form competition
by simply reweighing each option according to its a priori likelihood
within the context of a specific task..
[39] Stephanie Houde, Kristina Brimijoin, Michael Muller, Steven I. Ross,
Dario Andres Silva Moran, Gabriel Enrique Gonzalez, Siya Kunde, Mor-
gan A. Foreman, and Justin D. Weisz. 2025. Controlling AI Agent Par-
ticipation in Group Conversations: A Human-Centered Approach. In
Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Inter-
faces (IUI ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 390–408. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712089
[40] Jiaxiong Hu, Junze Li, Yuhang Zeng, Dongjie Yang, Danxuan Liang, Helen
Meng, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2024. Designing Scaffolding Strategies for Con-
versational Agents in Dialog Task of Neurocognitive Disorders Screening.
In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–21. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642960
TLDR: A scaffolding framework is designed for a Conversational agents
empowered by ChatGPT to administer dialog-based NCD screening tests
and implications for the future design of CAs that enable scaffolding for
scalable NCD screening are proposed..
[41] Xinhui Hu and Michael Twidale. 2023. A Scoping Review of Mental
Model Research in HCI from 2010 to 2021. In HCI International 2023 –
Late Breaking Papers, Masaaki Kurosu, Ayako Hashizume, Aaron Marcus,
Elizabeth Rosenzweig, Marcelo M. Soares, Don Harris, Wen-Chin Li,
Dylan D. Schmorrow, Cali M. Fidopiastis, and Pei-Luen Patrick Rau (Eds.).
Vol. 14054. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 101–125. doi:10.1007/978-
3-031-48038-6_7 Series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
[42] Edwin Hutchins. 1995. Cognition in the Wild. MIT Press.
[43] Dongwook Hwang and Woojin Park. 2018. Design heuristics set for X:
A design aid for assistive product concept generation. Design Studies 58
(2018), 89–126. doi:10.1016/j.destud.2018.04.003
[44] Ayu Iida, Kohei Okuoka, Satoko Fukuda, Takashi Omori, Ryoichi
Nakashima, and Masahiko Osawa. 2024. Integrating Large Language
Model and Mental Model of Others: Studies on Dialogue Communication
Based on Implicature. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Human-Agent Interaction. ACM, Swansea United Kingdom, 260–269.
doi:10.1145/3687272.3688303
[45] Interaction Design Foundation - IxDF. 2015. Gulf of Evaluation and Gulf
of Execution. https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-
glossary-of-human-computer-interaction/gulf-of-evaluation-and-gulf-
of-execution Retrieved July 10, 2025.
[46] Ellen Jiang, Kristen Olson, Edwin Toh, Alejandra Molina, Aaron Donsbach,
Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2022. PromptMaker: Prompt-based
Prototyping with Large Language Models. In CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts. ACM, New Orleans LA
USA, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3491101.3503564
[47] Peiling Jiang, Jude Rayan, Steven P. Dow, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Grapho-
logue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Di-
agrams. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User In-
terface Software and Technology. ACM, San Francisco CA USA, 1–20.
doi:10.1145/3586183.3606737 TLDR: Graphologue is an interactive system
that converts text-based responses from LLMs into graphical diagrams to
facilitate information-seeking and question-answering tasks, and enables
graphical, non-linear dialogues between humans and LLMs, facilitating
information exploration, organization, and comprehension..
[48] Xiaoneng Jin, Mark Evans, Hua Dong, and Anqi Yao. 2021. Design Heuris-
tics for Artificial Intelligence: Inspirational Design Stimuli for Supporting
UX Designers in Generating AI-Powered Ideas. In Extended Abstracts of
the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
Yokohama Japan, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3411763.3451727 TLDR: Case studies
suggest that AI design heuristics can be used as design stimuli in the
early conceptual design phase to support practitioners in exploring a
larger design space for the generation of AI-powered ideas..
[49] Martin Jonsson and Jakob Tholander. 2022. Cracking the code: Co-coding
with AI in creative programming education. In Creativity and Cognition.
ACM, Venice Italy, 5–14. doi:10.1145/3527927.3532801 TLDR: A study
of a group of university students using generative machine learning to
translate from natural language to computer code explores how the use
of the AI tool can be understood in terms of co-creation, focusing on how
the tool may serve as a resource for understanding and learning..
[50] Ankur Joshi, Saket Kale, Satish Chandel, and D Kumar Pal. 2015. Lik-
ert scale: Explored and explained. British Journal of Applied Science &
Technology 7, 4 (2015), 396–403. doi:10.9734/BJAST/2015/14975
[51] M. G. Kendall and B. Babington Smith. 1939. The Problem of m Rankings.
The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 10, 3 (1939), 275–287. http://www.
jstor.org/stable/2235668
[52] Klaus Krippendorff. 2006. The Semantic Turn: A New Foundation for Design.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. doi:10.1201/9780203299951
[53] Franc Lavrič and Andrej Škraba. 2023. Brainstorming will never be the
same again—a human group supported by artificial intelligence. Machine
Learning and Knowledge Extraction 5, 4 (2023), 1282–1301.
[54] Matthew V Law, Amritansh Kwatra, Nikhil Dhawan, Matthew Einhorn,
Amit Rajesh, and Guy Hoffman. 2020. Design intention inference for
virtual co-design agents. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents. 1–8.
[55] Q. Vera Liao, Hariharan Subramonyam, Jennifer Wang, and Jennifer Wort-
man Vaughan. 2023. Designerly Understanding: Information Needs for
Model Transparency to Support Design Ideation for AI-Powered User
Experience. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–21. doi:10.1145/3544548.3580652
[56] David Chuan-En Lin, Hyeonsu B. Kang, Nikolas Martelaro, Aniket Kit-
tur, Yan-Ying Chen, and Matthew K. Hong. 2025. Inkspire: Supporting
Design Exploration with Generative AI through Analogical Sketching.
doi:10.1145/3706598.3713397 arXiv:2501.18588 [cs] TLDR: Inkspire is a
sketch-driven tool that supports designers in prototyping product design

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
concepts with analogical inspirations and a complete sketch-to-design-
to-sketch feedback loop, and improved aspects of the co-creative process
by allowing designers to effectively grasp the current state of the AI to
guide it towards novel design intentions..
[57] David Chuan-En Lin and Nikolas Martelaro. 2024. Jigsaw: Supporting De-
signers to Prototype Multimodal Applications by Chaining AI Foundation
Models. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems. ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–15. doi:10.1145/3613904.3641920
TLDR: Jigsaw enhanced designers’ understanding of available foundation
model capabilities, provided guidance on combining capabilities across
different modalities and tasks, and served as a canvas to support design
exploration, prototyping, and documentation..
[58] Yuwen Lu, Chengzhi Zhang, Iris Zhang, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2022. Bridg-
ing the Gap Between UX Practitioners’ Work Practices and AI-Enabled
Design Support Tools. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems Extended Abstracts. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 1–7.
doi:10.1145/3491101.3519809
[59] Donghyeok Ma, Joon Hyub Lee, Junwoo Yoon, Taegyu Jin, and Seok-
Hyung Bae. 2023. SketchingRelatedWork: Finding and Organizing Papers
through Inking a Node-Link Diagram. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. ACM,
San Francisco CA USA, 1–3. doi:10.1145/3586182.3616685 TLDR: This
work presents a novel interactive system that allows users to perform
these tasks quickly and easily on the 2D canvas with pen and multitouch
inputs and turns users’ sketches and handwriting into a node-link diagram
of papers and citations that users can iteratively expand in situ toward
constructing a coherent narrative when writing Related Work sections..
[60] Kathleen M MacQueen, Eleanor McLellan, Kelly Kay, and Bobby Milstein.
1998. Codebook development for team-based qualitative analysis. Cam
Journal 10, 2 (1998), 31–36.
[61] Matthew B Miles and A Michael Huberman. 1994. Qualitative data anal-
ysis: An expanded sourcebook. sage.
[62] Michael Muller, Lydia B Chilton, Mary Lou Maher, Charles Patrick Mar-
tin, Minsik Choi, Greg Walsh, and Anna Kantosalo. 2025. GenAICHI
2025: Generative AI and HCI at CHI 2025. In Proceedings of the Extended
Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
Article 782, 9 pages. doi:10.1145/3706599.3707213
[63] Michael Muller and Justin Weisz. 2022. Extending a Human-AI Collabora-
tion Framework with Dynamism and Sociality. In Proceedings of the 1st An-
nual Meeting of the Symposium on Human-Computer Interaction for Work
(Durham, NH, USA) (CHIWORK ’22). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, Article 10, 12 pages. doi:10.1145/3533406.3533407
[64] Gjoko Muratovski. 2021. Research for Designers: A Guide to Methods and
Practice. SAGE Publications Ltd, London. 100 pages.
https://digital.
casalini.it/9781529767568 Casalini id: 5282254.
[65] Donald A. Norman. 1986. Cognitive Engineering. In User Centered System
Design. 31–61. Chapter 2.
[66] Donald A. Norman. 2013. The design of everyday things: Revised and
expanded edition. Basic Books.
[67] Peter O’Donovan, Aseem Agarwala, and Aaron Hertzmann. 2015. De-
signScape: Design with Interactive Layout Suggestions. In Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1221–1224. doi:10.1145/2702123.2702149
[68] OpenAI. 2024. Hello GPT-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/
[69] Swaroop Panda. 2025. A Framework for LLM-powered Design Assistants.
(2025).
https://consensus.app/papers/a-framework-for-llmpowered-
design-assistants-panda/412b8a148d805cf798fa1e60bb02c5d8/?utm_
source=chatgpt
[70] Raja Parasuraman and Victor Riley. 1997.
Humans and Automa-
tion: Use, Misuse, Disuse, Abuse.
Human Factors 39, 2 (1997), 230–
253.
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1518/001872097778543886 doi:10.1518/
001872097778543886
[71] Hua Xuan Qin, Guangzhi Zhu, Mingming Fan, and Pan Hui. 2025. Toward
Personalizable AI Node Graph Creative Writing Support: Insights on
Preferences for Generative AI Features and Information Presentation
Across Story Writing Processes. (2025).
[72] Arun Rai. 2020. Explainable AI: From Black Box to Glass Box. Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science 48 (2020), 137–141. doi:10.1007/s11747-
019-00710-5
[73] Jeba Rezwana and Mary Lou Maher. 2023. User Perspectives on Ethical
Challenges in Human-AI Co-Creativity: A Design Fiction Study. In Pro-
ceedings of the 15th Conference on Creativity and Cognition (Virtual Event,
USA) (C&C ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 62–74. doi:10.1145/3591196.3593364
[74] Nathalie Riche, Anna Offenwanger, Frederic Gmeiner, David Brown, Hugo
Romat, Michel Pahud, Nicolai Marquardt, Kori Inkpen, and Ken Hinckley.
2025. AI-Instruments: Embodying Prompts as Instruments to Abstract
& Reflect Graphical Interface Commands as General-Purpose Tools. In
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, Yokohama Japan, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714259
[75] Nathalie Riche, Anna Offenwanger, Frederic Gmeiner, David Brown, Hugo
Romat, Michel Pahud, Nicolai Marquardt, Kori Inkpen, and Ken Hinckley.
2025. AI-Instruments: Embodying Prompts as Instruments to Abstract
& Reflect Graphical Interface Commands as General-Purpose Tools. In
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, Article 1104, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714259
[76] Phillip Richter, Heiko Wersing, and Anna-Lisa Vollmer. 2024. Reduc-
ing Mental Model Mismatch with Intention-Based Feedback in Human-
Robot Teaching. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Human-Agent Interaction. ACM, Swansea United Kingdom, 399–401.
doi:10.1145/3687272.3690896 TLDR: The MMM Score is introduced, a
feedback mechanism designed to align human teaching behavior with
robot learning by quantifying mismatches between the human teacher’s
mental model and the robot’s learning capabilities..
[77] Alan M. Rugman and Joseph R. D’Cruz. 1993. The "double diamond"
model of international competitiveness: The canadian experience. MIR:
Management International Review 33 (1993), 17–39.
http://www.jstor.
org/stable/40228188 Publisher: Springer.
[78] Prabir Sarkar and Amaresh Chakrabarti. 2011. Assessing design creativity.
Design Studies 32, 4 (2011), 348–383. doi:10.1016/j.destud.2011.01.002
[79] Donald A. Schön. 1983.
The Reflective Practitioner: How Pro-
fessionals Think in Action.
Basic Books.
https://consensus.
app/papers/the-reflective-practitioner-how-professionals-
schon/7f1fcb05627a5e24ae491d27f8b7f89f/?utm_source=chatgpt
[80] Norbert M. Seel, Dirk Ifenthaler, and Pablo Pirnay-Dummer. 2009. Mental
models and problem solving: Technological solutions for measurement
and assessment of the development of expertise. Brill, Leiden, The Nether-
lands, 17 – 40. doi:10.1163/9789087907112_004
[81] Stefan Seidel, Nicholas Berente, Aron Lindberg, Kalle Lyytinen, and Jef-
frey V Nickerson. 2018. Autonomous tools and design: a triple-loop
approach to human-machine learning. Commun. ACM 62, 1 (2018), 50–
57.
[82] Orit Shaer, Angelora Cooper, Osnat Mokryn, Andrew L Kun, and Hagit
Ben Shoshan. 2024. AI-Augmented Brainwriting: Investigating the use of
LLMs in group ideation. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–17. doi:10.
1145/3613904.3642414 TLDR: This paper devised a collaborative group-
AI Brainwriting ideation framework, which incorporated an LLM as an
enhancement into the group ideation process, and evaluated the idea
generation process and the resulted solution space..
[83] Hanshu Shen, Lyukesheng Shen, Wenqi Wu, and Kejun Zhang. 2025.
IdeationWeb: Tracking the Evolution of Design Ideas in Human-AI Co-
Creation. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, Yokohama Japan, 1–19. doi:10.1145/3706598.
3713375
[84] Helen Sheridan, Emma Murphy, and Dympna O’Sullivan. 2023. Exploring
Mental Models for Explainable Artificial Intelligence: Engaging Cross-
disciplinary Teams Using a Design Thinking Approach. In Artificial
Intelligence in HCI, Helmut Degen and Stavroula Ntoa (Eds.). Vol. 14050.
Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 337–354. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-
35891-3_21 Series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
[85] Yang Shi, Tian Gao, Xiaohan Jiao, and Nan Cao. 2023. Understanding De-
sign Collaboration Between Designers and Artificial Intelligence: A Sys-
tematic Literature Review. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 7, CSCW2 (Sept. 2023), 1–35. doi:10.1145/3610217 TLDR: A
landscape analysis of AI for design is conducted via a systematic literature
review of 93 papers, which provides a bird’s eye view of overall patterns
and reveals three themes interpreted from the paper corpus associated
withAI for design, including AI assisting designers, designers assisting
AI, and characterizing designer-AI collaboration..
[86] Donghoon Shin, Lucy Lu Wang, and Gary Hsieh. 2024. From paper to
card: Transforming design implications with generative AI. In Proceedings
of the 2024 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (Chi ’24).
Association for Computing Machinery, Honolulu, HI, USA and New York,
NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642266 Number of pages: 15 tex.articleno:
13 TLDR: Through an iterative design process, a system is built that helps
create design cards from academic papers using an LLM and text-to-image
model and is revealed that designers perceived the design implications
from the design cards as more inspiring and generative compared to

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
reading original paper texts..
[87] Atefeh Shokrizadeh, Boniface Bahati Tadjuidje, Shivam Kumar, Sohan
Kamble, and Jinghui Cheng. 2025. Dancing With Chains: Ideating Under
Constraints With UIDEC in UI/UX Design. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1106, 23 pages.
doi:10.1145/3706598.3713785
[88] Herbert A Simon and Allen Newell. 1971. Human problem solving: The
state of the theory in 1970. American psychologist 26, 2 (1971), 145.
[89] LINDA J. SKITKA, KATHLEEN L. MOSIER, and MARK BURDICK. 1999.
Does automation bias decision-making? International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies 51, 5 (1999), 991–1006. doi:10.1006/ijhc.1999.0252
[90] Nancy Staggers and A.F. Norcio. 1993. Mental models: concepts for
human-computer interaction research. International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies 38, 4 (1993), 587–605. doi:10.1006/imms.1993.1028
[91] Erik Stolterman. 2008. The nature of design practice and implications for
interaction design research. International Journal of Design 2, 1 (2008),
55–65.
https://consensus.app/papers/the-nature-of-design-practice-
and-implications-stolterman/1ef65fb0ed5051539f5db7989a4385c1/
?utm_source=chatgpt
[92] Anselm Strauss and Juliet Corbin. 1998. Basics of qualitative research
techniques. (1998).
[93] Hari Subramonyam, Roy Pea, Christopher Pondoc, Maneesh Agrawala,
and Colleen Seifert. 2024. Bridging the Gulf of Envisioning: Cognitive
Challenges in Prompt Based Interactions with LLMs. In Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Honolulu
HI USA, 1–19. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642754
[94] Sangho Suh, Meng Chen, Bryan Min, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Haijun Xia.
2024. Luminate: Structured Generation and Exploration of Design Space
with Large Language Models for Human-AI Co-Creation. In Proceedings
of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
Honolulu HI USA, 1–26. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642400 TLDR: This work
proposes a framework that facilitates the structured generation of design
space in which users can seamlessly explore, evaluate, and synthesize a
multitude of responses in large language models, introducing a way to
harness the creative potential of LLMs..
[95] Layla Sun, Mengmeng Qin, and Benji Peng. 2024. LLMs and Diffusion
Models in UI/UX: Advancing Human-Computer Interaction and Design.
doi:10.31219/osf.io/y38ux
[96] Michael J. Tauber and David Ackermann. 1991. Mental models and human-
computer interaction 2. Number 7 in Human factors in information tech-
nology. North-Holland Distributors for the U.S.A. and Canada, Elsevier
Science Pub. Co, Amsterdam New York New York, N.Y., U.S.A.
[97] Michael Terry, Chinmay Kulkarni, Martin Wattenberg, Lucas Dixon, and
Meredith Ringel Morris. 2023. AI Alignment in the Design of Interactive
AI: Specification Alignment, Process Alignment, and Evaluation Support.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00710 (2023). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2311.00710
[98] Jakob Tholander and Martin Jonsson. 2023. Design Ideation with AI
- Sketching, Thinking and Talking with Generative Machine Learning
Models. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems
Conference. ACM, Pittsburgh PA USA, 1930–1940. doi:10.1145/3563657.
3596014
[99] Karl T Ulrich, Steven D Eppinger, and Maria C Yang. 1995. Product design
and development. Vol. 384. McGraw-hill New York.
[100] Josh Urban Davis, Fraser Anderson, Merten Stroetzel, Tovi Grossman,
and George Fitzmaurice. 2021. Designing Co-Creative AI for Virtual
Environments. In Creativity and Cognition. ACM, Virtual Event Italy, 1–
11. doi:10.1145/3450741.3465260 TLDR: Calliope is a virtual reality (VR)
system that enables users to explore and manipulate generative design
solutions in real time and provides design guidelines to aid others in the
development of co-creative AI systems in virtual environments..
[101] Janneke van de Pol, Monique Volman, and Jos Beishuizen. 2010. Scaffold-
ing in Teacher–Student Interaction: A Decade of Research. Educational
Psychology Review 22, 3 (2010), 271–296.
[102] Willemien Visser. 1994. Organisation of design activities: opportunistic,
with hierarchical episodes. Interacting with Computers 6, 3 (1994), 239–274.
doi:10.1016/0953-5438(94)90015-9 Retrieved on 9/8/2025.
[103] Anqi Wang, Zhizhuo Yin, Yulu Hu, Yuanyuan Mao, and Pan Hui. 2024.
Exploring the Potential of Large Language Models in Artistic Creation:
Collaboration and Reflection on Creative Programming. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.09750 (2024).
[104] Xingyi Wang, Xiaozheng Wang, Sunyup Park, and Yaxing Yao. 2025.
Mental Models of Generative AI Chatbot Ecosystems. In Proceedings
of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. ACM,
Cagliari Italy, 1016–1031. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712125 TLDR: This paper
investigates users’ mental models of how GenAI Chatbot Ecosystems
work, and finds that participants held a more consistent and simpler
mental model towards third-party ecosystems than the first-party ones,
resulting in higher trust and fewer concerns towards the third-party
ecosystems..
[105] Justin D. Weisz, Jessica He, Michael Muller, Gabriela Hoefer, Rachel
Miles, and Werner Geyer. 2024. Design Principles for Generative AI
Applications. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 378, 22 pages.
doi:10.1145/3613904.3642466
[106] David Wood, Jerome S. Bruner, and Gail Ross. 1976. The role of tutoring
in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 17, 2
(1976), 89–100.
[107] Tongshuang Wu, Ellen Jiang, Aaron Donsbach, Jeff Gray, Alejandra
Molina, Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2022. PromptChainer: Chain-
ing Large Language Model Prompts through Visual Programming. In
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Ab-
stracts. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 1–10. doi:10.1145/3491101.3519729
TLDR: This work explores the LLM chain authoring process, and designs
PromptChainer, an interactive interface for visually programming chains
that supports building prototypes for a range of applications, as well as
supporting low-fi chain prototyping..
[108] Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. 2022. AI Chains:
Transparent and Controllable Human-AI Interaction by Chaining Large
Language Model Prompts. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 1–22. doi:10.1145/3491102.
3517582 TLDR: Chaining LLM steps together is introduced, where the
output of one step becomes the input for the next, thus aggregating the
gains per step, and found that Chaining not only improved the quality
of task outcomes, but also significantly enhanced system transparency,
controllability, and sense of collaboration..
[109] Xiaotong (Tone) Xu, Jiayu Yin, Catherine Gu, Jenny Mar, Sydney Zhang,
Jane L. E, and Steven P. Dow. 2024. Jamplate: Exploring LLM-Enhanced
Templates for Idea Reflection. In Proceedings of the 29th International Con-
ference on Intelligent User Interfaces. ACM, Greenville SC USA, 907–921.
doi:10.1145/3640543.3645196 TLDR: Jamplate integrates LLM capabilities
into design templates, streamlining the collection and organization of
user-generated content and LLM responses within the template struc-
ture, and discusses the potential of designing LLM-enhanced templates
to instigate critical reflection..
[110] Zihan Yan, Chunxu Yang, Qihao Liang, and Xiang ’Anthony’ Chen. 2023.
XCreation: A Graph-based Crossmodal Generative Creativity Support
Tool. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User In-
terface Software and Technology. ACM, San Francisco CA USA, 1–15.
doi:10.1145/3586183.3606826 TLDR: This work introduces XCreation, a
novel CST that leverages generative AI to support cross-modal story-
book creation and integrates an interpretable entity-relation graph to
intuitively represent picture elements and their relations, improving the
usability of the underlying generative structures..
[111] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and
Acting in Language Models. arXiv:2210.03629 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/
abs/2210.03629
[112] Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, and Daphne Ippolito. 2022. Word-
craft: Story Writing With Large Language Models. In 27th International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. ACM, Helsinki Finland, 841–852.
doi:10.1145/3490099.3511105 TLDR: This work built Wordcraft, a text edi-
tor in which users collaborate with a generative language model to write
a story, and shows that large language models enable novel co-writing
experiences..
[113] J.D. Zamfirescu-Pereira, Richmond Y. Wong, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian
Yang. 2023. Why Johnny Can’t Prompt: How Non-AI Experts Try (and
Fail) to Design LLM Prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Hamburg Germany, 1–21.
doi:10.1145/3544548.3581388 TLDR: This work explores whether non-AI-
experts can successfully engage in “end-user prompt engineering” using
a design probe—a prototype LLM-based chatbot design tool supporting
development and systematic evaluation of prompting strategies..
[114] Jingyue Zhang and Ian Arawjo. 2025. ChainBuddy: An AI-assisted Agent
System for Generating LLM Pipelines. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Yokohama
Japan, 1–21. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714085 TLDR: It is found that when
using AI assistance, participants reported a less demanding workload, felt
more confident, and produced higher quality pipelines evaluating LLM
behavior, and design implications for the future of workflow generation
assistants to mitigate the risk of over-reliance are drawn..

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
[115] Jiaje Zhang and Donald A. Norman. 1994. Representations in distributed
cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science 18, 1 (1994), 87–122. doi:10.1016/0364-
0213(94)90021-3
[116] Rui Zhang, Ziyao Zhang, Fengliang Zhu, Jiajie Zhou, and Anyi Rao. 2024.
Mindalogue: LLM-powered nonlinear interaction for effective learning
and task exploration. https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10570 arXiv: 2410.10570
[cs.HC].
[117] Jiayi Zhou, Renzhong Li, Junxiu Tang, Tan Tang, Haotian Li, Weiwei Cui,
and Yingcai Wu. 2024. Understanding Nonlinear Collaboration between
Human and AI Agents: A Co-design Framework for Creative Design. In
Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–16. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642812 TLDR: A
subconscious change in people’s attitudes towards AI agents is noticed,
shifting from perceiving them as mere executors to regarding them as
opinionated colleagues, which effectively fostered the exploration and
reflection processes of individual designers..
A
Prompt
A.1
Prompt following Design Stages
A.2
Prompt in Design Reasoning Canvas (B)
(Main-canvas)
The Basic Role and Capabilities prompt is:
You
are
a
top-tier
AI
design
assistant,
serving
artists and designers who develop and iterate on
products or artworks in node-based design tools. The
current design context is: {bg}, and the design goal
is: {dg}. Please base your subsequent thinking on
this design knowledge and background. You possess
strong logical reasoning, critical thinking, and rich
artistic creativity, and can help them improve and
perfect their design workflow using a node-based
approach.
The Tool Workflow prompt is:
You have a deep understanding of your work within a
node-based design tool that has a two-layer canvas.
Your actions must strictly match the current canvas
and the corresponding API call stage.
1. Main-Canvas Workflow: Based on the design context
and design goal, used for building a macro design
process and detailed design content points within
each process.
* Design Pipeline Generation: Your starting point is
on the left panel of the main canvas. You will use
the generate_pipeline API call to generate a macro,
high-level design pipeline.
* Design Pipeline Node Content Filling: Your task
is to elaborate specifically on the content to be
explored in each step, rather than broad concepts
and discussions.
* Standalone AI Node brainstorm: Users can also create
standalone AI nodes on the main canvas and connect
them to any existing nodes. When the brainstorm API
is called, you need to fully understand the context
of the preceding nodes and act as a dynamic creative
partner.
Current
Task
Instruction
Canvas
Location:
"Main-Canvas"
(Macro-level
workflow)
Current
Role: "Project Architect" Core Task: "Your task is
to build a high-level design process, ensuring the
logic is clear and the steps are complete. Think
systematically and structurally."
A.3
Prompt in LLM Reasoning Chain Viewer
(C) (Sub-canvas)
The Basic Role and Capabilities prompt is:

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
- You are a top-tier AI design assistant for artists
and designers using node-based tools. Your goal is to
**turn vague exploration goals into clear, actionable
strategies and plans**.
- Current design context: {bg}, design goal: {dg}.
Base all reasoning on this.
- You have strong logical, critical, and creative
skills.
Familiar
with
concepts
such
as
‘HMW‘,
‘SCAMPER‘, ‘MVP‘, ‘Co-design‘, etc.
**Tool Workflow:** - Node-based design tool with
two-layer canvas: 1. **Main Canvas**: Overall design
mapping. 2. **Sub-Canvas**: In-depth exploration of
a specific node.
-
**Thinking
Chain
Generation**:
In
sub-canvas,
construct a 3-4 step logical roadmap from the user’s
exploration
goal.
Last
step
must
be
a
concrete
solution.
-
**Thinking
Chain
Step
Execution**:
Focus
on
a
specific step, generate detailed, structured, and
actionable content (How). Adapt output to step type
(analysis, divergence, convergence).
-
**Iterative
Content
Optimization**:
After
user
edits,
analyze
style
and
reasoning
to
produce
higher-quality iterative content.
**Current Task Instruction:** - Canvas: Sub-Canvas
(In-depth exploration) - Role: Design Strategy &
Execution
Consultant
-
Mission:
**Transform
core
problems into concrete, implementable solutions.**
Produce practical plans, design drafts, or ideas.
Turn "ideas" into "actions."
A.3.1
Generative Four Reasoning Methods from Single Node
in Thinking Chain. The Classify rationale prompt is:
Core Task: Map user instructions to one of the six
stages of the Double Diamond design model. Focus
on
understanding
**design
intent**
and
expected
deliverables.
1. **Discover Divergent** - Goal: Diverge, collect
raw information widely. - Deliverables: Competitor
analysis, user interviews, market data, literature
reviews.
2. **Discover Convergent** - Goal: Converge, organize
data to find patterns and insights. - Deliverables:
User personas, journey maps, pain point lists.
3. **Define** - Goal: Translate insights into core
problems and design principles. - Deliverables: "How
Might
We"
questions,
problem
statements,
design
principles.
4. **Develop Divergent** - Goal: Brainstorm broadly,
explore novel ideas. - Deliverables: Idea sketches,
storyboards, concept cards.
5. **Develop Convergent** - Goal: Filter and combine
ideas
into
feasible
prototypes.
-
Deliverables:
Low-fidelity
prototypes,
feature
lists,
system
diagrams.
6.
**Deliver**
-
Goal:
Finalize
and
communicate
solution value. - Deliverables: Service blueprints,
high-fidelity mockups, pitch decks.
The Definition of Reasoning Modes prompt is:
1. Inductive Reasoning
**Core
Definition**:
From
multiple
specific,
independent observed cases, identify, extract, and
summarize
common
patterns,
rules,
or
principles.
This is an aggregation process from "specific to
general."
**Applicable Scenarios/Keywords**:
- **Pattern Recognition**: When the task involves
analyzing, classifying, finding trends, and looking
for
commonalities,
the
focus
is
on
identifying
"what" is happening repeatedly from raw data.
- **Principle Formulation**: When the task involves
summarizing,
extracting
insights,
defining
user
personas,
and
researching
competitors,
the
focus
is on elevating the identified patterns to guiding
principles of "what this means."
**Design Examples**:
<Example 1>
<Example 2>
<Example 3>
2. Deductive Reasoning
**Core
Definition**:
Apply
one
or
more
known,
general
principles,
theories,
or
standards
to
a
specific situation to deduce concrete conclusions,
guiding plans, or conduct evaluations. This is an
application process from "general to specific."
**Applicable Scenarios/Keywords**:
-
**Standard-based
Validation**:
When
the
task
involves reviewing, testing, evaluating, validating,
and following standards, the focus is on making
judgments using clear, quantifiable standards.
-
**Theory-based
Application**:
When
the
task
involves
applying
theories,
feasibility
analysis,
usability walkthroughs, and plan design, the focus
is on using abstract theories or models as a guide
for creation.
**Design Examples**:
<Example 1>
<Example 2>
<Example 3>

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
3. Abductive Reasoning
**Core Definition**: Facing a problem to be solved,
a goal to be achieved, or a phenomenon that has
occurred,
propose
the
most
likely
explanation,
hypothesis,
or
solution.
This
is
an
exploratory
process of "seeking the best explanation/solution."
**Applicable Scenarios/Keywords**:
- **Diagnostic**: When the task involves diagnosing
problems,
analyzing
causes,
explaining
phenomena,
and finding root causes. (For example: Why is the
conversion rate low?)
- **Creative**: When the task involves conceiving,
planning,
designing,
seeking
inspiration,
brainstorming,
and
exploring
possibilities.
(For
example: How to design the positioning for a new
product?)
**Design Examples**:
<Example 1>
<Example 2>
<Example 3>
4. Analogical Reasoning
**Core
Definition**:
Identify
structural
similarities
between
two
things
in
different
fields, and migrate knowledge, models, or solutions
from a familiar field to a new field to inspire
innovation.
This
is
a
"cross-domain
borrowing"
process.
**Applicable Scenarios/Keywords**:
- **Inspirational Analogy**: When the task involves
seeking inspiration, cross-domain referencing, and
divergent thinking, the focus is on borrowing broad
concepts or experiences to break fixed thinking.
-
**Model
Transfer**:
When
the
task
involves
borrowing processes, simplifying complex concepts,
and finding concrete solutions, the focus is on
systematically
transplanting
a
mature,
specific
structure or mechanism from one field.
**Design Examples**:
<Example 1>
<Example 2>
<Example 3>
A.3.2
Generate Rationale Prompt following Six Design Stages.
The Generate rationale prompt is:
**Task:**
Generate
approximately
140
words
of
detailed content **only for the current execution
step** in the thinking chain.
1. Current Design Stage - Stage Name: {rationale_type}
- Core Goal: {rationale_type_description}
All output must serve the core goal of this stage.
2. Role and Context - Main-canvas Goal: {design_goal}
- Design Context: {bg} - Parent Node: {parent_title}
— {parent_content} - Subcanvas Goal (reference only):
’{goal}’ - Completed Preceding Steps: {context_str}
- Current Execution Step: ’{current_node_content}’
3.
Golden
Example
Follow
the
format,
depth,
and
professional standards of this successful example:
{few_shot_example}
4. Execution Instructions 1. Align with Stage Goal:
Reflect the core goal (analysis, divergence, etc.).
2. Mimic the Example: JSON structure, Markdown, and
professional style must match the golden example. 3.
Logical Coherence: Base content on preceding steps;
do not address subsequent steps.
Output Format (JSON)
{
"title": "High-level summary",
"rationale1": "Around 30 words",
"rationale2": "Around 30 words",
"rationale3": "Around 30 words",
"rationale4": "Around 30 words"
}
B
User Study
B.1
Demographic Information of
Participants
Table 1 shows 20 participating designers harboring diverse
design and LLM experiences.
B.2
Open-up Design Tasks
(1) How can design improve people’s experience of waiting
in public spaces?
(2) How can a solution be designed to help people adapt
their daily habits and reduce carbon emissions in the
face of climate change?
(3) How can digital technology and interaction design sup-
port chronically ill people to build better communica-
tion and emotional support with their caregivers?
(4) How can gamification experiences enhance children’s
interest and desire to explore scientific knowledge?
(5) How can you design a tool for SMEs to help them
quickly build brand recognition on a limited budget?
(6) How can you make remote collaborative teams more
productive and feel a sense of belonging in a virtual
space through design?
These 6 propositions cover different domains such as public
space experience, environmental sustainability, health care,
educational games, branding, remote collaboration, etc., and

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
Table 1: Summary of democratized information of participants in the user study.
NO.
Gender
Age
Profession
Design Exp
LLM Exp
Frequency of LLM Use
Used Node-based Design Tool
P1
Male
28
Product, architecture designer
>8 years
2
1-2 times per week
✓
P2
Male
25
Service designer
>8 years
4
3-5 times per week
✓
P3
Female
28
Speculative designer
>8 years
5
3-5 times per week
✓
P4
Female
26
Industrial, interaction designer
>8 years
4
Daily
✓
P5
Male
27
Architecture designer
>8 years
1
Monthly
✓
P6
Male
26
Product, visual communication designer
>8 years
2
Biweekly
✓
P7
Female
26
Product, visual communication designer
>8 years
5
Daily
✓
P8
Female
28
Interaction designer
<2 year
3
Daily
✓
P9
Female
28
Cinema, architecture designer
5-8 year
4
3-5 times per week
✓
P10
Female
23
Architecture designer
5-8 year
3
3-5 times per week
P11
Male
23
Architecture designer
5-8 year
3
Daily
✓
P12
Female
22
Digital media, interaction designer
5-8 year
4
3-5 times per week
✓
P13
Female
24
Interaction designer
2-5 year
4
Daily
✓
P14
Female
22
Digital media, interaction designer
5-8 year
4
3-5 times per week
✓
P15
Female
27
Visual communication designer
5-8 year
2
1-2 times per week
P16
Female
23
Industrial designer
5-8 year
4
3-5 times per week
✓
P17
Male
22
Architecture designer
2-5 year
3
3-5 times per week
P18
Female
31
Service designer
>8 years
4
Daily
✓
P19
Male
19
Interaction, product designer
2-5 year
4
Daily
✓
P20
Female
24
Interaction, product designer
5-8 year
5
Daily
✓
Note: LLM experience were categorized into five levels, from low to high: Level 1 - Little experience; Level 2 - Some experience; Level 3 - Moderate experience; Level 4 - Substantial experience; Level 5 - Professional.
at the same time are all open enough to be addressed by ap-
proaches from different design domains (product, service, in-
teraction, visual, spatial, etc.).
B.3
Evaluation of Overall Human-AI
Interaction Experience
Table 2 shows the ten scored items for the five factors.
Table 2: 10 Questions for Overall Human-AI Interaction
Experience Questionnaire
Factor
Content
Controllable
1. I can control AI to generate responses in
line with my expectations.
2. I know how to modify my operations to
correct AI’s responses.
Transparent
1. I can recognize AI’s systematic thinking
and reasoning processes.
2. I can understand the logic behind AI’s re-
sponses.
Cognitive Load
1. As the design process progresses, I feel
overwhelmed by excessive information, mak-
ing it difficult to organize and manage.
2. As the design process progresses, I find it
challenging to recall or locate specific histor-
ical information.
Collaboration
1. I engage in comprehensive collaboration
with AI.
2. I maintain deep interaction with AI.
Trust
1. I consider AI to be a reliable design expert.
2. I trust AI’s responses and will use them in
real design scenarios.
B.4
Designers’ confidence and reliance
A seven-point questionnaire questions were added for collab-
orative experience, referring to prior study [16]:
(1) In the design process, I rely on AI.
(2) In the design process, I am confident in my results.
B.5
Design Quality Metric Rationale
To provide a comprehensive and robust evaluation of design
quality, we employed a composite metric that combines the
Novelty (𝑁) and Usefulness (𝑈) of a design solution [43, 78].
The final design quality score is the sum of these two metrics.
This appendix details the components of our expert-rating
metric, with a focus on the methodology for calculating Use-
fulness (𝑈) from a set of sub-indicators.
B.5.1
Calculation of Usefulness (𝑈). The Usefulness metric
(𝑈) is designed to capture the practical impact and value of a
design solution. It is a product of three key factors: the Level
of Importance (𝐿), the Rate of Popularity of Usage (𝑅), and the
Frequency of Usage (𝐹). The formula for calculating 𝑈is:
𝑈= 𝐿× 𝑅× 𝐹
Each variable is defined and measured as follows:
Level of Importance (𝐿): This metric is based on Maslow’s
hierarchy of needs and assesses how fundamental the
human need addressed by the design is. Experts rate
this on a 5-point scale, where higher scores indicate a
more fundamental need being fulfilled.
Rate of Popularity of Usage (𝑅): This factor measures
the design’s reach and influence within its target user

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
base. It is not a simple percentage but a holistic assess-
ment of its acceptance and widespread adoption. For
example, for product designs, it reflects market pene-
tration; for public spaces, it reflects community engage-
ment; and for visual brands, it reflects brand recognition.
The score is provided on a scale of 0 to 1, precise to one
decimal place.
Frequency of Usage (𝐹): This factor evaluates the sus-
tained value and engagement a design provides to its
users. It assesses whether the interaction is one-off or
continuous. For product designs, it relates to user re-
tention; for public spaces, it measures repeat visits and
dwell time; and for visual brands, it relates to repeated
exposure and long-term memory. The score is provided
on a scale of 0 to 1, precise to one decimal place.
B.5.2
Final Design Quality Score. To ensure the Usefulness
metric (𝑈) has equal weight to the Novelty metric (𝑁) in the
final score, the calculated𝑈value is converted to a 1-to-7 scale.
The final Design Quality score is then the sum of the converted
Usefulness score and the Novelty score.
Before calculating the final score, we performed Kendall’s
W consistency test on the scores for both 𝑁and 𝑈to ensure
high inter-rater reliability among the expert raters.

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anqi Wang et al.
C
Findings
C.1
Comparison Tables
Table 3: Comparison of overall AI interaction experience between DesignerlyLoop and the baseline.
Metric
DesignerlyLoop
Baseline
Statistical Test
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
t or V
p
Controllable
16.2
2.88
13.5
3.12
𝑡= 3.65
.002**
Collaboration
16.4
2.56
13.8
4.06
𝑡= 2.80
.012*
Transparent
16.3
2.47
13.8
3.89
𝑉= 135
.006**
Cognitive Load
9.40
5.11
11.8
4.82
𝑡= −1.76
.094
Trust
15.9
2.02
12.6
3.03
𝑉= 136
<.001***
Note: *** 𝑝< 0.001, ** 𝑝< 0.01, * 𝑝< 0.05
Table 4: Comparison of Creativity Support Index (CSI) ratings between DesignerlyLoop and the baseline.
Metric
DesignerlyLoop
Baseline
Statistical Test
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
t or V
p
Collaboration
16.1
2.07
13.0
3.46
𝑡= 3.78
0.001**
Enjoyment
16.4
2.63
12.7
4.54
𝑉= 164
<.001***
Exploration
17.4
2.11
14.0
3.69
𝑡= 4.25
<.001***
Expressiveness
16.2
2.32
13.5
3.24
𝑡= 4.70
<.001***
Immersion
12.9
4.48
11.0
4.58
𝑡= 2.65
.016*
Worth Effort
16.2
1.96
14.4
3.33
𝑉= 116
.067
Total
95.2
12.4
78.7
17.9
𝑡= 4.54
<.001***
Note: *** 𝑝< 0.001, ** 𝑝< 0.01, * 𝑝< 0.05
Table 5: Comparison of self-reported design outcomes between DesignerlyLoop and the baseline system.
Metric
DesignerlyLoop
Baseline
Statistical Test
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
t or V
p
𝑁(Novelty)
5.20
1.54
4.25
1.59
𝑡= 3.866
.001**
𝑈(Usefulness)
2.79
1.66
1.96
1.29
𝑡= 4.171
< .001***
Rate of Popularity
6.6
1.96
5.95
1.54
𝑉= 71
.074
Frequency of Usage
6.95
2.06
6.40
2.30
𝑡= 1.868
.077
Importance
3.95
0.89
3.50
1.92
𝑉= 28
.018 *
Quality
3.99
1.41
3.11
1.32
𝑡= 5.286
< .001***
Note: *** 𝑝< 0.001, ** 𝑝< 0.01, * 𝑝< 0.05
C.2
Correlation Tables
Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009

DesignerlyLoop
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Table 6: Comparison of self-assessment and expert ratings of design quality for DesignerlyLoop and the baseline
systems.
Self-Assessment
Expert Rating
DesignerlyLoop
Baseline
DesignerlyLoop
Baseline
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛
5.20
4.25
5.10
4.79
𝑁(Novelty)
𝑆𝐷
1.54
1.59
1.18
1.35
𝑝
𝑝= .001**
𝑝= .058
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛
2.79
1.96
3.03
2.62
𝑈(Usefulness)
𝑆𝐷
1.66
1.29
1.61
1.56
𝑝
𝑝< .001***
𝑝= .004**
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛
3.99
3.11
4.05
3.78
Quality
𝑆𝐷
1.41
1.32
1.17
1.40
𝑝
𝑝< .001***
𝑝= .006**
Note: *** 𝑝< 0.001, ** 𝑝< 0.01, * 𝑝< 0.05
Table 7: Correlation analysis of overall AI interaction experience.
Baseline
DesignerlyLoop
Metric
𝑁
𝑈
Quality
𝑁
𝑈
Quality
Controllable
𝜌= 0.375*
𝜌= 0.341*
𝑟= 0.412**
𝜌= 0.113
𝜌= 0.36*
𝑟= 0.279.
Transparent
𝜌= 0.003
𝜌= 0.223
𝑟= 0.134
𝜌= −0.218
𝜌= 0.208
𝑟= 0.039
Cognitive Load
𝜌= −0.217
𝜌= −0.127
𝜌= −0.175
𝜌= −0.002
𝜌= −0.298.
𝜌= −0.111
Collaboration
𝜌= 0.322*
𝜌= 0.435**
𝜌= 0.395*
𝜌= 0.255
𝜌= 0.387*
𝜌= 0.352*
Trust
𝜌= 0.425**
𝜌= 0.48**
𝜌= 0.49**
𝜌= 0.36*
𝜌= 0.398*
𝜌= 0.468**
Table 8: Correlation analysis of self-confidence (Agency 1) and reliance on AI (Agency 2).
Baseline
DesignerlyLoop
Metric
𝑁
𝑈
Quality
𝑁
𝑈
Quality
Agency1
𝜌= −0.041
𝜌= 0.188
𝜌= 0.079
𝜌= −0.116
𝜌= 0.223
𝜌= 0.085
Agency2
𝜌= 0.372∗
𝜌= 0.408∗∗
𝜌= 0.441∗∗
𝜌= 0.231
𝜌= 0.43∗∗
𝜌= 0.406∗∗
Table 9: Correlation analysis of self-assessment scores for design outcomes between DesignerlyLoop and the baseline
using CSI.
Baseline (Task A)
DesignerlyLoop (Task B)
Metric
𝑁
𝑈
Quality
𝑁
𝑈
Quality
Collaboration
𝑟= 0.228
𝑟= 0.681***
𝑟= 0.469*
𝜌= −0.074
𝜌= 0.274
𝜌= 0.143
Enjoyment
𝑟= 0.603**
𝑟= 0.829***
𝑟= 0.766***
𝜌= 0.479*
𝑟= 0.705***
𝑟= 0.685***
Exploration
𝑟= 0.717***
𝑟= 0.620**
𝑟= 0.733***
𝜌= 0.314
𝜌= 0.285
𝜌= 0.325
Expressiveness
𝜌= 0.740***
𝜌= 0.681***
𝜌= 0.773***
𝜌= 0.342
𝑟= 0.517*
𝑟= 0.500*
Immersion
𝑟= 0.239
𝑟= 0.355
𝑟= 0.317
𝜌= 0.114
𝜌= 0.336
𝜌= 0.286
WorthEffort
𝜌= 0.549*
𝜌= 0.723***
𝜌= 0.672**
𝜌= 0.197
𝑟= 0.210
𝑟= 0.296
