Know Your Intent: An Autonomous Multi-Perspective LLM Agent
Framework for DeFi User Transaction Intent Mining
Qian’ang Mao
me@c0mm4nd.com
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
Yuxuan Zhang
cassie-ikk@smail.nju.edu.cn
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
Jiaman Chen
jiamanchen@smail.nju.edu.cn
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
Wenjun Zhou
wzhou4@utk.edu
The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville
Knoxville, Tennessee, USA
Jiaqi Yan
jiaqiyan@nju.edu.cn
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
Abstract
As Decentralized Finance (DeFi) develops, understanding user in-
tent behind DeFi transactions is crucial yet challenging due to
complex smart contract interactions, multifaceted on-/off-chain
factors, and opaque hex logs. Existing methods lack deep seman-
tic insight. To address this, we propose the Transaction Intent
Mining (TIM) framework. TIM leverages a DeFi intent taxonomy
built on grounded theory and a multi-agent Large Language Model
(LLM) system to robustly infer user intents. A Meta-Level Planner
dynamically coordinates domain experts to decompose multiple
perspective-specific intent analyses into solvable subtasks. Question
Solvers handle the tasks with multi-modal on/off-chain data. While
a Cognitive Evaluator mitigates LLM hallucinations and ensures
verifiability. Experiments show that TIM significantly outperforms
machine learning models, single LLMs, and single Agent baselines.
We also analyze core challenges in intent inference. This work
helps provide a more reliable understanding of user motivations in
DeFi, offering context-aware explanations for complex blockchain
activity.
CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy →Economics of security and privacy;
Cryptography; • Information systems →Data analytics; • Com-
puting methodologies →Multi-agent systems; Natural language
processing.
Keywords
Multi-agent System, Intent Mining, Decentralized Finance, On-
chain Transaction
1
Introduction
As the core of Web3, decentralized finance (DeFi) has seen a rapid
development in recent years [2], introducing an open and permis-
sionless financial infrastructure where users can interact with smart
contracts through on-chain transactions to perform operations such
as depositing, lending, and trading [8]. Behind these on-chain ac-
tivities lie specific user intents, referring to the purposes users seek
to accomplish through single or a series of operations [16].
The current DeFi ecosystem still faces many challenges, includ-
ing but not limited to difficulties in matching NFT trading demand
?
?
?
(Intent): ?
be fulfilled by
be fulfilled by
be fulfilled by
be decomposed into
3. Swap LINK to ETH
2. Approve Swap Router
to spend my LINK
1. Swap ETH to LINK
be fulfilled by
Figure 1: User’s intent on spot trading for profit. Even though
it represents one of the simplest and most common inten-
tions, it still requires analyzing the on-chain data behind
three related transactions, summarizing the corresponding
semantics, and incorporating external market price data in
order to understand the purpose of each transaction and
thereby infer the underlying intent.
[12, 26], frequent threats to capital security [35, 37], and severe
volatility caused by market panic [3, 7]. In the “dark forest" environ-
ment of DeFi, which is characterized by frequent and drastic fluctu-
ations, a deep understanding of users’ transaction intents is crucial
[24, 31, 34]. However, the actual process of intent action is extremely
complex, as shown in Figure 1, which seriously affects the develop-
ment of the industry[30]. As emphasized by Blocknative, a Web3
infrastructure enterprise, Web3 remains notoriously complicated,
and usability continues to pose a major challenge for the ecosys-
tem1. Therefore, mining the DeFi transaction intents of on-chain
users helps reveal the underlying behavioral logic and decision-
making motives, thus more accurately depicting user profiles. This
also provides more targeted support for almost all on-chain tasks
like risk monitoring, product design, and market forecasting. For
existing research, incorporating user intent can potentially provide
finer-grained semantic information and behavioral explanations
for various addresses.
Despite its importance, the need to recognize DeFi transaction
intents is underscored. Firstly, on-chain transaction records are
represented in the form of hexadecimal logs and low-level smart
contract calls, making it inherently challenging to decode these
records and infer human-readable intent. Secondly, on-chain user
behavior cannot be fully captured by isolated transaction attributes
such as from, to, or value. True intents often hide within complex
1https://www.blocknative.com/blog/web3-transaction-lifecycle
arXiv:2511.15456v1  [cs.AI]  19 Nov 2025

Qian’ang Mao, Yuxuan Zhang, Jiaman Chen, Wenjun Zhou, and Jiaqi Yan
contract execution logic or across multiple related transactions.
Moreover, DeFi-related on-chain activities do not occur in a vacuum.
User behavior on the blockchain is frequently influenced by off-
chain factors such as macroeconomic conditions (e.g., interest rate
changes, new regulatory policies), mainstream media coverage,
social media sentiment, or the opinions of key opinion leaders
(KOLs) [6, 15, 32]. Therefore, to accurately infer transaction intents,
there is an urgent need for an autonomous and intelligent method
that goes beyond single transaction analysis.
To address the challenges, we have designed and implemented
the Transaction Intent Mining (TIM) framework, which analyzes
transaction intentions through the autonomous behavior of multi-
layered agents, which are based on large language models (LLMs).
Our contributions are mainly in the following three aspects:
• We designed and implemented a workflow enabling agents
to autonomously act and perform DeFi user intent analysis,
setting a new standard in the field.
• We improved the analysis result by enhancing analytical
granularity and reducing the hallucinations of LLMs by
integrating on-chain and off-chain data.
• We demonstrated the overall superiority of the framework
in the experimental results and discussed the current chal-
lenges in DeFi user transaction intent mining tasks by ex-
amining the explainable LLM outputs.
2
Related Work
2.1
Blockchain Transaction Analysis
Blockchain transaction analysis has evolved from statistical ap-
proaches to sophisticated pattern recognition methodologies, in-
cluding quantitative metrics [14], graph-based fund flow tracking
[33], trading strategy identification [19], and security monitoring
systems [23].
Despite these advancements, existing approaches remain pre-
dominantly focused on structural and quantitative transaction as-
pects, exhibiting a significant limitation in the semantic under-
standing of user intents [25, 29, 30]. This limitation is particularly
pronounced in DeFi, where complex multi-step transactions and
intricate protocol interactions necessitate a deeper semantic com-
prehension that current approaches fail to provide, thus creating a
critical research gap in transaction intent mining.
2.2
LLM-based Autonomous Agent
Recent advancements in LLM research have established sophis-
ticated autonomous agent frameworks with enhanced cognitive
systems [10, 17], domain-specific tool utilization [22, 27], and collab-
orative reasoning capabilities [5, 20]. Preliminary applications have
already emerged, Li et al. [13] enhance trading decisions through an
agent reflection mechanism that analyzes outcomes of past transac-
tions. The capabilities align theoretically with blockchain analysis
requirements, offering potential solutions to complex information
processing challenges.
However, a significant research gap exists in applying agents to
blockchain transaction intent mining, where semantic interpreta-
tion capabilities remain largely unexplored despite the promise for
transforming on-chain behavioral analysis beyond the limitations
of traditional approaches. In our preliminary research, we experi-
mented with existing agent frameworks to address intent mining.
We found that frameworks such as AutoGen and LangChain, along
with methodologies like ReAct and Conversation, encountered en-
gineering challenges that prevented them from yielding effective
results. These frameworks were unable to capture users’ complete
intents, often stopping at a shallow parsing of basic semantics.
Furthermore, when processing on-chain data, these frameworks
struggle with the comprehension of low-level data and are hindered
by context dependency. This results in critical issues such as factual
information loss and exacerbated hallucinations.
2.3
Intent Mining Methods and Challenges
Intent mining has progressed from traditional approaches, includ-
ing rule-based systems and supervised learning models [11, 36] to
blockchain-specific methods like MoTS [30], yet these techniques
struggle with DeFi’s dynamic nature and complex behavioral se-
quences. Emerging LLM-based approaches [1, 9, 38] offer promising
alternatives through advanced language processing capabilities and
contextual understanding.
A critical gap persists as current LLM applications predomi-
nantly address scenarios with natural language inputs, these intent
recognition tasks [18, 21, 28] are all trying to learn intent through
labeled sentence fragments, which neglects blockchain transaction
intent analysis with its unique challenges of complex interactions
and patterns on on-chain structured data and off-chain information,
which underscores the need for approaches designed specifically
for multi-step reflective analysis.
3
TIM: A Structurally Deterministic Workflow
Framework for Intent Mining
As shown in Figure 2, the Transaction Intent Mining (TIM) frame-
work structure is a structurally deterministic workflow for solving
the intent mining task. This chapter will unfold according to the
overall workflow, focusing on the functional design of various
agents and systematically analyzing the entire framework around
the core challenges faced in actual practice.
3.1
Problem Formulation
We formalize the problem of mining transaction intent as an un-
supervised multi-label assignment task. Given a transaction tx,
our goal is to design an analysis system 𝑀to analyze the trans-
action tx and determine the potential set of intents 𝐼tx in all in-
tents 𝐼from the taxonomy. In the implementation, we propose a
multi-agent intent mining framework, formulated as the analytical
system 𝑀= {𝐴1,𝐴2, . . . ,𝐴𝑛; C}, where each 𝐴𝑖is an autonomous
LLM-based agent, and C denotes the coordination mechanism that
organically integrates these agents through structured collabora-
tion and interaction. Our research focuses on the design of 𝐴𝑛and
C to enable effective multi-agent cooperation, which enhances the
inferred result 𝐼tx.

Know Your Intent: An Autonomous Multi-Perspective LLM Agent Framework for DeFi User Transaction Intent Mining
Any Transaction
Intent Taxonomy
Meta-Level
Planner
Cognitive Evaluator
Intents behind the
Transaction
What's the intent of the
transaction?
{
  "perspectives": [
    {
      "name": "...",
      "description": "...",
      "prompt": "You are a
Domain Expert at ...",
      "tool_suggestions": [
        "..."
      ],
      "tips": [
        "..."
      ],
    },
    {
      "name": "...",
      "description": "...",
      "prompt": "You are a
Domain Expert at ...",
      "tool_suggestions": [
        "..."
      ],
      "tips": [
        "..."
      ],
    },
    ...
  ]
}
Perspective ...
Perspective A
Perspective N
Parallel Multi-perspective Analysis
Multi-perspective Aggregate
Transaction
Parameters
Web3Resear.ch
Chain Data
Blockchain Node
Raw Data
Online Web
Search
Perspective-Specific
Domain Expert
{
  "items": [
    {
      "question": "What is ...?",
      "prompt": "Use ... to trace ..."
    },
    {
      "question": "What is ...?",
      "prompt": "Utilize ... to review ..."
    },
    {
      "question": "Are there ... ?",
      "prompt": "Use ... to check ...."
    }
    ...
  ],
  "target": "Analyze ...",
  ...
}
Web Page
 Browse
Web3Resear.ch
Labels
Question Solver autonomous behavior sequence
with buffer memory  management
Live Data Sources
be called by
derive
Perspective-Specific
Domain Expert
summarized by
Data Fetch
Read
Summarize
Think
Question Solver
Analysis
Report
Evidence Validity?
Intent Relevance?
Evaluation
Report
Final 
Intent
Report
Intent A
Intent B
Intent C
Intent
Explanation
Intent
Explanation
Reject
Reason
Figure 2: The Transaction Intent Mining (TIM) Framework initiates with a Meta-Level Planner processing transaction parameters
and an intent taxonomy to derive perspective-specific domain experts, which then conduct parallel multi-perspective analysis
by executing question-solving sequences leveraging live data sources to generate analysis reports, which are aggregated and
cognitively evaluated for evidence validity and intent relevance to produce a Final Intent Report detailing validated transaction
intents and explanations.
Core Category
Axial Coding
Secondary Coding
Investment
or
Speculative
Profit-seeking
B1 Trading Strategies
A1 Spot Trading Profit
A2 Leveraged Trading Profit
A3 Long-term Holding
A4 Arbitrage
B2 Liquidity Mining and Yield
Farming
A5 Provide/Create Liquidity Pool
A6 Participating in Lending
A7 Yield Aggregation
B3 Staking
A8 ETH Liquid Staking
A9 DeFi Governance Token Staking
A10 Compound Liquid Staking
B4 Early Project Participation
A11 Participating in Airdrops
A12 Participating in Presales/Initial Offerings
Personal Risk Control and Man-
agement
B5 Asset Security Assurance
A13 Using Secure Wallets
A14 Permission Management
A15 Purchasing Insurance
B6 Investment Risk Manage-
ment
A16 Stop-loss Strategies
A17 Hedging Strategies
Project
Participation
and
Ecosystem Governance
B7 Direct Governance
A18 Voting
A19 Proposals
B8 Indirect Governance
A20 Delegating Voting Rights
A21 Vulnerability Reporting
Table 1: DeFi User Intent Core Category Coding Framework
3.2
DeFi Transaction Intent Taxonomy
Derivation
To start, we need a comprehensive DeFi user transaction intent
taxonomy to obtain the DeFi transaction intent set 𝐼and to guide
and carry out the subsequent intent mining work. In our previous
work[16], we developed the DeFi transaction intent taxonomy using
a Grounded Theory approach, following Corbin and Strauss [4].
Specifically, we drew data from semi-structured interviews with
DeFi users of varying experience and extensive textual data from
official tutorials and community forums for 51 representative DeFi
protocols.
Our iterative coding process began with open coding of these
data sources, through which we identified 110 initial concepts of
user intent. We then systematically grouped these concepts during
axial coding into 21 broader categories. Finally, through selective
coding, we further refined these categories into nine main themes,

Qian’ang Mao, Yuxuan Zhang, Jiaman Chen, Wenjun Zhou, and Jiaqi Yan
which we synthesized into three overarching dimensions: Invest-
ment or Speculative Profit-seeking, Personal Risk Control and Man-
agement, and Project Participation and Ecosystem Governance, all
unified by the core theoretical concept of ‘Risk-reward Trade-off
Orientation.’
We verified theoretical saturation by analyzing additional data
from the community and protocols, which confirmed stability and
comprehensiveness. Final results are shown in the Table 1.
3.3
Reflective Multimodal Live Data Retrieval
Since a single transaction decision can be influenced by numerous
factors, such as DeFi protocol details, contract methods, market
fluctuations, etc., multimodal live data retrieval is an essential and
crucial component for analyzing blockchain transaction intents.
However, existing blockchain data research has only analyzed lim-
ited scenarios within given datasets, which poses a significant ob-
stacle to practical applications. Therefore, we first implemented live
data retrieval with tool use functions, allowing agents to seamlessly
link the latest blockchain transactions with the latest internet and
blockchain data.
To further enhance the retrieval capabilities, we incorporated
a reflective design in the data retrieval process. Specifically, after
acquiring data, we use prompts to help understand and critique
the data, aiding them in optimizing their retrieval methods in the
next execution. For example, they can fetch more data, switch data
sources, or further process the data. The reflective design is benefi-
cial for handling complex structured data, such as smart contract
function arguments and event logs, in multiple steps, and for un-
covering the sources and destinations of funds through complex
contexts.
In addition, we also need to address the issue of multimodality:
the various types of structured data in blockchain, HTML data from
web pages, and text data from agent communications need to be
unified. To achieve this, we simplified the blockchain data by JSON
formatting and removing content that is not suitable for machine
reading, such as Merkle trees, while retaining important readable
information like from and to addresses and values; we kept the
main body tag text information from HTML; and ultimately, all
data was unified into a pure text format between agents.
3.4
Meta-Level Planner (MP)
The first to start working is a meta-level planning agent with meta-
cognitive capabilities, whose core task is to dynamically plan multi-
perspective analysis routes based on transaction context. Each per-
spective represents a subsequent expert cognitive model, used to
decompose actual tasks from specific angles. This design originates
from the fact that on-chain DeFi transactions have extremely high
heterogeneity and opacity, and a single analysis path often fails to
comprehensively cover the complex intents behind the transactions.
Traditional static rules or black-box models lack scalability and ex-
plainability. Therefore, we need an agent that can dynamically plan
analysis paths, adapt to various transaction structures, and possess
semantic regulation capabilities. Based on literature and industry
experience, we guide the agent to conduct an in-depth analysis in
the following aspects:
Smart Contract Analysis: This derived agent specializes in ana-
lyzing the structure and functionality of blockchain smart contracts.
Drawing from program understanding and static analysis theories,
it focuses on interpreting contract code, ABI interfaces, and inter-
action patterns to infer the purpose of user-contract interactions.
Temporal Context Analysis: This derived agent implements tem-
poral cognitive modeling methods to analyze the historical back-
ground and associated patterns of transactions. By examining user
historical behaviors, related transactions, and market environments,
it identifies potential behavioral patterns and intent indicators.
Market Dynamics Analysis: Derived agent implements multi-
modal information fusion mechanisms to focus on off-chain market
data and macro environments, contextualizing blockchain transac-
tions within broader economic and social backgrounds.
In addition, due to the autonomy, there may also be derived other
perspectives such as protocol background analysis, hacker behavior
analysis, etc., depending on the transaction parameters.
3.5
Perspective-Specific Domain Experts (DE)
In actual tasks, the analysis of intent is often not a single linear
process but requires handling multi-layered, interdependent com-
posite structures. Such structured intents typically involve multiple
sub-goals, reasoning steps, or context dependencies, making the
analysis process itself complex. Traditional methods often rely on
single paths or static features for judgment, making it difficult to
effectively stage and decompose these composite structures. Conse-
quently, they face significant limitations when dealing with complex
scenarios.
To address this, we designed a mechanism to simulate domain
experts based on the “divide-and-conquer” strategy: for each con-
cerned perspective, we introduced an expert agent specialized in
that field, who would proactively propose multiple sub-questions
and derive intelligent agents to answer and analyze around these
questions. DE can more logically capture intents by breaking down
complex intent analysis problems into a chain of reasoning in ques-
tion form. In actual implementation, DE is designed to be processed
in parallel due to its independence and lack of interference, which
improves analysis efficiency. DE agents use data structure com-
ponents to plan tasks, with plans containing three key elements:
objectives, to-do items, and prompts, forming a complete task de-
scription. This structured task representation enables agents to
clearly understand their responsibilities and execution direction,
enhancing the precision and controllability of task execution.
After all issues have been resolved, the original DE will read and
check each answer, analyze the user’s transaction intent through
the reasoning chain, and finally provide an intent analysis report
from that perspective.
3.6
Question Solvers (QS)
Each question from DE will derive a Question Solver, which will
solve the problem through the most granular task execution, ad-
hering to the “Single Responsibility Principle." This design signifi-
cantly reduces task complexity, improves execution efficiency, and
enhances result quality. Specific actions will be autonomously de-
cided by the QS without human intervention.

Know Your Intent: An Autonomous Multi-Perspective LLM Agent Framework for DeFi User Transaction Intent Mining
In the specific implementation, as shown in 2, although QS is
completely derived from DE, the main workflow of QS is to perform
data retrieval, then decide the subsequent data processing, continue
retrieval, or in-depth thinking, or complete the summary based on
the reading results of the data in the ReAct paradigm. The result
of each question will be brought into the memory of the next QS,
helping the latest QS to solve the current problem based on the
results of all previous questions.
3.7
Cognition Evaluator (CE)
Although the analysis relies on credible external data, the hallu-
cination issue of LLMs still makes it unreliable to depend on the
analysis results generated by LLMs.
To address this issue, we introduced CE before obtaining the
final result. It will critically evaluate the analysis reports generated
by all DEs from two dimensions: verifiability of facts and relevance
to intent. Verifiability of facts refers to whether the statements,
information, or reasoning in the report can be validated by objec-
tive and traceable evidence. This critique prevents the LLM from
generating hallucinations based on unfounded imagination and
speculation about user intent. Relevance to intent refers to the
degree to which the final results of the report are related to the
user’s intent. The purpose of this analysis is to filter out the un-
substantiated claims in irrelevant fields from the model’s output,
preventing these irrelevant parts from affecting the derivation of
the final result.
Ultimately, CE evaluates these two dimensions to rank the pos-
sible intents mentioned in the DE’s analysis report, excluding in-
correct intents, and the remaining intents become the system’s
output 𝐼tx, which includes the most likely intent as well as multiple
possible intents.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
Experiment Environment: We conduct all experiments using
Python on Arch Linux with 8 × RTX 3090 GPUs. More details are in
Appendix A. All code, including prompts, is available on GitHub2.
Transaction Sources: Wecreated a list of intent-labeled Ethereum
DeFi transactions covering all intent categories, as most of the data
needs to be retrieved autonomously on-demand, by agents, from the
internet or the blockchain. The list includes transactions involving
mainstream protocols (e.g., Uniswap, Aave, and Compound) and
tokens (e.g., WETH, WBTC, USDT, and USDC), up to March 2025.
The complete list is covered in the Table 5. We invited multiple
experts in the industry to manually label these transactions to
determine intents within the intent taxonomy. Experts assigned
transaction intents based on their personal experience with online
tools. We adopted a multi-round labeling process and combined an
expert consensus validation mechanism to ensure the accuracy and
consistency.
Evaluation metrics: We employed recall, precision, and F1-micro
to assess the performance.
TIM Setup and Baselines: In the experiment, we default to using
Grok-2 as the base model for TIM, with CRIPSE-like style prompts
2https://github.com/c0mm4nd/TIM
for initializing and guiding agents. To evaluate the effectiveness
of our framework, we selected multiple types of machine learning
models (Naive Bayes, SVM, Decision Tree, XGBoost, and CNN), a
single LLM, and a single agent as baseline models. Among them, ma-
chine learning uses common transaction characteristics in cutting-
edge fields such as blockchain transaction fraud detection, which
is shown in the Table 7; the single LLM means that it only relies on
the Grok-2 and tries to complete the task through the prompt engi-
neering and basic transaction information; single agent standing
on the single LLM, functioning like other ReAct agent frameworks,
with all tools and data sources in QS, and multi-round reflectively
thinking. In addition, we also selected different base models for per-
formance comparison within the framework. Besides the originally
designed Grok-2, the models include Grok-3, Grok-3-Mini, GPT-4.0,
GPT-4o-Mini, LLaMA 3.3, and Qwen 3 30B. Finally, we conducted
a comparison using a different prompt engineering framework,
LangGPT.
4.2
Experimental Results
Method
Recall
Precision
F1-micro
Naive Bayes
0.76
0.36
0.49
SVM
0.59
0.50
0.54
Decision Tree
0.65
0.44
0.52
XGBoost
0.68
0.55
0.61
CNN+sigmoid
0.62
0.58
0.62
Single LLM
0.33
0.28
0.30
Single Agent
0.38
0.45
0.41
w/o MP
0.62
0.65
0.63
w/o DE
0.40
0.48
0.44
w/o QS
0.32
0.30
0.31
w/o CE
0.72
0.45
0.55
TIM
0.78
0.72
0.75
w/ grok-3-mini)
0.72
0.70
0.71
w/ grok-3
0.80
0.69
0.74
w/ gpt-4o-mini
0.73
0.69
0.71
w/ gpt-4o
0.77
0.68
0.72
w/ qwen3-30b
0.69
0.67
0.66
w/ LangGPT
0.75
0.71
0.73
Table 2: Comparative and Ablation Study Results
To validate our multi-agent approach, we conducted comparative
experiments against machine learning models, single LLM, and
single-agent setups. Results are shown in Table 2.
Our analysis shows that machine learning methods, such as
Naive Bayes and Decision Tree, achieved moderate recall but suf-
fered from low precision, indicating frequent false positives. These
models often misclassified transactions as Spot Trading Profit (A1),
which, while common, led to many incorrect predictions. In con-
trast, subtler intents like Arbitrage (A4) and Leveraged Trading
Profit (A2) were frequently overlooked. This suggests that tradi-
tional methods struggle to capture the complex, high-dimensional
patterns inherent in semantically rich blockchain data.
In contrast, TIM demonstrates significantly better performance
on evaluation metrics. Notably, whether using a LLM of standard

Qian’ang Mao, Yuxuan Zhang, Jiaman Chen, Wenjun Zhou, and Jiaqi Yan
Intent Code
Recall
Precision
F1-micro
A1
1.00
0.73
0.84
A2
0.67
0.53
0.59
A3
0.82
0.73
0.77
A4
0.60
0.56
0.58
A5
0.53
0.55
0.54
A6
0.85
0.60
0.70
A7
0.72
0.68
0.70
A8
0.57
0.52
0.54
A9
0.88
0.90
0.89
A10
0.56
0.72
0.29
A11
0.30
0.28
0.29
A12
0.55
0.60
0.57
A13
0.92
0.80
0.86
A14
1.00
0.52
0.68
A15
0.82
0.74
0.78
A16
0.53
0.43
0.47
A17
0.42
0.45
0.43
A18
1.00
1.00
1.00
A19
0.67
0.33
0.44
A20
1.00
1.00
1.00
A21
0.50
0.50
0.50
Table 3: TIM Performance on Individual Intent Labels
scale, a more streamlined small-scale model, or a specialized inference-
optimized model, TIM consistently maintains a similar and high
level of intent mining performance. This fully demonstrates the
robustness and effectiveness of the proposed multi-agent collab-
orative architecture, indicating that the framework’s design can
effectively integrate the analytical capabilities of models of differ-
ent scales and reduce over-reliance on the original performance
of specific ultra-LLM. This ensures the quality of analysis while
providing greater flexibility and potential efficiency advantages for
practical deployment.
Through the analysis of the results in Table 3 and a review of
the output reports, we found that for intents with names match-
ing method names, such as "Voting" (A18) and "Delegated Voting
Rights" (A20), perfect F1-micro scores were achieved; however, for
intents such as "Spot Trading Profit" (A1) and "Permission Manage-
ment" (A14), which are closely tied to basic foundational operations,
although they showed high recall rates, they were not sufficiently
precise. Conversely, for more complex and ambiguous intents, TIM
faces greater challenges; for example, "Participating in Airdrop"
(A11), "Compound Liquidity Mining" (A10), and complex strategies
such as "Stop-Loss Strategy" (A16) and "Hedging Strategy" (A17)
had relatively lower F1-micro scores. This performance difference
highlights our advantage in interpreting transactions with clear
on-chain footprints, while also indicating the need for improvement
in its accuracy when handling intents that are not uniquely defined,
involve multiple steps, or depend on external environmental factors.
This may require fine-tuning of LLMs to enhance understanding of
DeFi domain-specific knowledge.
In the comparison of prompt engineering frameworks, LangGPT
performed relatively less effectively than the default CRIPSE style,
although the gap was not substantial.
4.3
Ablation Study
To further evaluate the effectiveness of our multi-agent approach,
we designed additional ablation experiments with two alternative
configurations: a single LLM approach (removing both multi-agent
collaboration and external tools) and a single-agent approach (re-
moving only multi-agent collaboration while retaining external
tools).
As shown in Table 2, the single LLM approach, which operated
without external tools or multi-agent collaboration, yielded the
weakest performance across all metrics. This result underscores
the limitations of large language models in interpreting complex
domains such as blockchain without contextual knowledge or spe-
cialized support. Although the introduction of external tools within
a single-agent setup led to some improvement, it still fell short
compared to traditional machine learning methods and our full
framework. These findings confirm the necessity of multi-agent
collaboration and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach in enhancing LLM-based analysis of on-chain transac-
tions.
In addition, we carried out more fine-grained ablation experi-
ments. Specifically, in the w/o MP setting, MP was replaced with
three fixed perspective instructions. In the w/o DE setting, the prob-
lem was solved directly using perspective instructions, without
domain decomposition or final summarization. In the w/o DS set-
ting, DE conducted the analysis directly, without QS processing.
Finally, in the w/o CE setting, the results were aggregated directly,
without verification. The results, as shown in Table 2, demonstrate
that each module design is essential.
Since the agent retrieves and processes a large amount of exter-
nal data, context optimization in reflective multimodal live data
retrieval becomes a critical component. Without optimization, most
of the data would exceed the LLM’s context length. To enable abla-
tion studies, we therefore applied chunk-and-summarize strategies
to these lengthy inputs. For comparison, using grok-2 with our
proposed data optimization techniques in reflective multimodal live
data retrieval (such as formatting and removing machine-generated
data like hashes), the average cost of analyzing a single transaction
intent can be reduced from around 10$ to less than 1$. Notably, by
leveraging a mini model, the analysis cost for most transactions
can be further reduced to below 0.1$, which makes it possible for
us to package it as an online service.
4.4
Sensitivity Analysis
In our sensitivity analysis, we focused on the LLM’s temperature
parameter, which controls output randomness: higher values pro-
duce more diverse responses, while lower values result in more
deterministic ones. In TIM, we categorized agent tasks into two
types: creative tasks (MP and DE) and execution tasks (QS and
CE). As shown in Table 4, we found that different temperature set-
tings worked optimally for different types of agent roles within our
system. Similarly, we also made further adjustments to the top-p
parameter of the LLM, but its impact on the analysis results was

Know Your Intent: An Autonomous Multi-Perspective LLM Agent Framework for DeFi User Transaction Intent Mining
Creative
Value
Executive
Value
Recall
Prec.
F1
Temp.=0.0
Temp.=0.0
0.56
0.53
0.54
Temp.=0.0
Temp.=0.5
0.53
0.50
0.51
Temp.=0.0
Temp.=0.8
0.50
0.48
0.49
Temp.=0.5
Temp.=0.0
0.78
0.72
0.75
Temp.=0.5
Temp.=0.5
0.65
0.62
0.63
Temp.=0.5
Temp.=0.8
0.61
0.57
0.59
Temp.=0.8
Temp.=0.0
0.62
0.58
0.60
Temp.=0.8
Temp.=0.5
0.57
0.54
0.55
Temp.=0.8
Temp.=0.8
0.53
0.51
0.52
Top-p=1
Top-p=1
0.78
0.72
0.75
Top-p=1
Top-p=0.5
0.76
0.72
0.74
Top-p=0.5
Top-p=1
0.75
0.71
0.73
Top-p=0.5
Top-p=0.5
0.75
0.72
0.74
Table 4: LLM Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis Results
not significant, possibly because the words in the JSON result were
limited by the taxonomy and live data, which had already achieved
the pruning effect of top-p.
4.5
Case Study
Figure 3 presents a comprehensive interaction sequence diagram
of our framework for mining transaction intent. This case study
illustrates a collaborative multi-agent system for blockchain trans-
action intent analysis. The MP breaks down complex intent mining
tasks into three perspectives: Smart Contract Analysis, Temporal
Contextual Analysis, and Market Dynamics Analysis. This struc-
tured decomposition establishes a comprehensive framework that
significantly reduces analytical complexity while maintaining thor-
oughness.
During each domain’s analysis phase, DE and QS on each per-
spective operate concurrently, accessing specific data tools to sup-
port their unique analysis, such as parsing smart contract ABI and
fetching market information. In each concurrent process, the DS
first generates a coherent list of questions. For example, in Smart
Contract Analysis, it asks which smart contracts are being inter-
acted with, which methods are called, and what the effects of these
methods are, etc. The QS then addresses these one by one using
external tools and data. The QS demonstrates dynamic execution
capabilities by continuously adjusting its analytical strategy based
on emerging evidence. For example, to interpret data from traces
and ABIs, the QS will autonomously retrieve function signatures
and, as a result, correctly understand transaction semantics.
CE integrates and evaluates intents by analyzing factorial infor-
mation—such as function signatures in Temporal Context Analy-
sis—which are crucial for determining intent. This process ensures
both the correctness and interpretability of the inferred intent be-
fore ultimately returning the result to the user. In this case, the
analysis ultimately identified a compound transaction intent involv-
ing governance token staking, liquidity provision, and spot trading,
where governance token staking was inferred by retrieving funda-
mental market knowledge, liquidity provision was derived from
the yield logic implemented in the token’s smart contract code,
and spot trading was determined by combining function signatures
with subsequent sell actions.
This workflow represents a progressive reasoning chain con-
struction, which mirrors expert cognitive processes, maintaining
flexibility when facing uncertainties and gradually refining hypothe-
ses based on evidence until reaching well-supported conclusions.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced the Transaction Intent Mining (TIM)
framework, a novel multi-agent system based on large language
models (LLMs) designed to autonomously infer user intents from
complex DeFi transactions. The TIM framework employs a self-
derived hierarchical agent architecture, including a Meta-Level Plan-
ner, Perspective-Specific Domain Experts, Question Solvers, and a
Cognition Evaluator. This structure decomposes the intent mining
task, integrates multimodal data, and critically evaluates findings
to ensure accuracy and mitigate issues like hallucination common
in LLMs. Our empirically derived DeFi intent taxonomy provides
a structured basis for analysis. Experimental results demonstrate
that TIM significantly outperforms established baselines on all met-
rics, highlighting the efficacy of its multi-perspective collaborative
reasoning and its ability to handle the dynamic and opaque nature
of DeFi. This work contributes a more explainable methodology for
understanding user intent in DeFi, paving the way for advanced
blockchain analytics and user-centric services.
References
[1] Anna Bodonhelyi, Efe Bozkir, Shuo Yang, Enkelejda Kasneci, and Gjergji Kasneci.
2024. User intent recognition and satisfaction with large language models: A
user study with chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02136 (2024).
[2] Paola Agnese Bongini, Francesca Mattassoglio, Alessia Pedrazzoli, and Silvio
Vismara. 2025. Crypto ecosystem: navigating the past, present, and future of
decentralized finance. The Journal of Technology Transfer (2025), 1–22.
[3] Hamid Cheraghali, Peter Molnár, Mattis Storsveen, and Florent Veliqi. 2024. The
impact of cryptocurrency-related cyberattacks on return, volatility, and trading
volume of cryptocurrencies and traditional financial assets. International Review
of Financial Analysis 95 (2024), 103439.
[4] Juliet M Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 1990. Grounded theory research: Procedures,
canons, and evaluative criteria. Qualitative sociology 13, 1 (1990), 3–21.
[5] Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2024. Self-collaboration code gener-
ation via chatgpt. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
33, 7 (2024), 1–38.
[6] Brij B Gupta, Akshat Gaurav, Juan Piñeiro-Chousa, M Ángeles López-Cabarcos,
and Isaac González López. 2025. Predicting the variation of decentralised finance
cryptocurrency prices using deep learning and a BiLSTM-LSTM based approach.
Enterprise Information Systems (2025), 2483456.
[7] Aiman Hairudin and Azhar Mohamad. 2024. The isotropy of cryptocurrency
volatility. International Journal of Finance & Economics 29, 3 (2024), 3779–3810.
[8] Campbell R Harvey, Ashwin Ramachandran, and Joey Santoro. 2021. DeFi and
the Future of Finance. John Wiley & Sons.
[9] Mengze Hong, Yuanfeng Song, Di Jiang, Wailing Ng, Yanjie Sun, and Chen Jason
Zhang. 2024. Dial-In LLM: Human-Aligned Dialogue Intent Clustering with
LLM-in-the-loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09049 (2024).
[10] Chenxu Hu, Jie Fu, Chenzhuang Du, Simian Luo, Junbo Zhao, and Hang Zhao.
2023. Chatdb: Augmenting llms with databases as their symbolic memory. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.03901 (2023).
[11] Qiao Huang, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Gail C Murphy. 2018. Automating intention
mining. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 46, 10 (2018), 1098–1119.
[12] Roman Kräussl and Alessandro Tugnetti. 2024. Non-fungible tokens (NFTs):
A review of pricing determinants, applications and opportunities. Journal of
Economic Surveys 38, 2 (2024), 555–574.
[13] Yuan Li, Bingqiao Luo, Qian Wang, Nuo Chen, Xu Liu, and Bingsheng He. 2024.
CryptoTrade: A Reflective LLM-based Agent to Guide Zero-shot Cryptocurrency
Trading. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. 1094–1106.

Qian’ang Mao, Yuxuan Zhang, Jiaman Chen, Wenjun Zhou, and Jiaqi Yan
Input
Meta-Level
Planner
Domain Expert
(Smart Contract
Analysis)
Domain Expert
(Temporal Context
Analysis)
Domain Expert
(Market Dynamics
Analysis)
Question
Solvers
(Multiple)
Cognitive
Evaluator
Output
Input
Meta-Level
Planner
Domain Expert
(Smart Contract
Analysis)
Domain Expert
(Temporal Context
Analysis)
Domain Expert
(Market Dynamics
Analysis)
Question
Solvers
(Multiple)
Cognitive
Evaluator
Output
Submit transaction
0xa0cf...0eb6
par
Derive and assign perspective
Derive and assign perspective
Derive and assign perspective
par
Request transaction trace and ABI
Return contract trace and ABI result
Request function signature
Return function signature information
Request historical transaction records
Return historical transaction data
Query market dynamics and regulatory policies
Return market and regulatory info
Forward analysis report
Final transaction intent report: Governance Token Staking, Providing/Creating Liquidity Pools, Spot Trading Profit
Integrate results from multiple perspectives
Evaluate identified intents and reasoning process
Forward analysis report
Forward analysis report
Figure 3: The Intent Mining Sequence Diagram illustrates actions (simplified for showcase) within the Case Study.
[14] Junliang Luo and Xue Liu. 2025. Optimizing Blockchain Analysis: Tackling
Temporality and Scalability with an Incremental Approach with Metropolis-
Hastings Random Walks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12491 (2025).
[15] Ji Luo, Shuguang Zhang, and Cheng Zhang. 2025. Drivers of investment in-
tentions across diverse cryptocurrency categories. Finance Research Letters 77
(2025), 107024.
[16] Qian’ang Mao, Yuxuan Zhang, Jiaman Chen, and Jiaqi Yan. 2025. From Motivation
to Execution: A Grounded Theory Study of the DeFi Transaction Intent Taxon-
omy. In ICIS 2025 Proceedings. https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2025/fintech/fintech/3
[17] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra
of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user
interface software and technology. 1–22.
[18] Thinh Pham, Chi Tran, and Dat Quoc Nguyen. 2023. MISCA: A Joint Model
for Multiple Intent Detection and Slot Filling with Intent-Slot Co-Attention. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023. 12641–
12650.
[19] Yuxin Qi, Jun Wu, Hansong Xu, and Mohsen Guizani. 2023. Blockchain Data
Mining With Graph Learning: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence (2023).
[20] Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan
Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2023. Communicative agents for software development.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924 6, 3 (2023).
[21] Libo Qin, Fuxuan Wei, Tianbao Xie, Xiao Xu, Wanxiang Che, and Ting Liu.
2021. GL-GIN: Fast and Accurate Non-Autoregressive Model for Joint Multiple
Intent Detection and Slot Filling. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). 178–188.
[22] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin
Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. 2023. Toolllm: Facilitating large language
models to master 16000+ real-world apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789 (2023).
[23] Gulab Sanjay Rai, SB Goyal, and Prasenjit Chatterjee. 2023. Anomaly detection in
blockchain using machine learning. In Computational Intelligence for Engineering
and Management Applications: Select Proceedings of CIEMA 2022. Springer, 487–
499.
[24] Janice Jianing Si, Tanusree Sharma, and Kanye Ye Wang. 2024. Understanding
user-perceived security risks and mitigation strategies in the web3 ecosystem. In
Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–22.
[25] Wanshui Song, Wenyin Zhang, Jiuru Wang, Linbo Zhai, Pengkun Jiang, Shanyun
Huang, and Bei Li. 2022. Blockchain data analysis from the perspective of
complex networks: Overview. Tsinghua Science and Technology 28, 1 (2022),
176–206.
[26] Mingdong Tang, Xingyu Feng, and Weili Chen. 2023. Exploring the NFT market
on ethereum: a comprehensive analysis and daily volume forecasting. Connection
Science 35, 1 (2023), 2286912.
[27] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu,
Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. Voyager: An open-ended embodied
agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 (2023).
[28] Di Wu, Liang Ding, Fan Lu, and Jian Xie. 2020.
SlotRefine: A Fast Non-
Autoregressive Model for Joint Intent Detection and Slot Filling. In Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP). 1932–1937.
[29] Jiajing Wu, Jieli Liu, Yijing Zhao, and Zibin Zheng. 2021. Analysis of cryptocur-
rency transactions from a network perspective: An overview. Journal of Network
and Computer Applications 190 (2021), 103139.
[30] Zhiying Wu, Jieli Liu, Jiajing Wu, Zibin Zheng, Xiapu Luo, and Ting Chen.
2023. Know your transactions: Real-time and generic transaction semantic
representation on blockchain & Web3 ecosystem. In Proceedings of the ACM Web
Conference 2023. 1918–1927.
[31] Zhiying Wu, Jiajing Wu, Hui Zhang, Zibin Zheng, and Weiqiang Wang. 2025.
Hunting in the Dark Forest: A Pre-trained Model for On-chain Attack Transaction
Detection in Web3. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025. 4519–4530.
[32] Yunfei Xing, Justin Z Zhang, Yuming He, and Yueqi Li. 2025. Toward an ecosystem
of non-fungible tokens from mapping public opinions on social media. Financial
Innovation 11, 1 (2025), 6.
[33] Haaroon Yousaf, George Kappos, and Sarah Meiklejohn. 2019. Tracing transac-
tions across cryptocurrency ledgers. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 19). 837–850.
[34] Yaman Yu, Tanusree Sharma, Sauvik Das, and Yang Wang. 2024. " Don’t put
all your eggs in one basket": How Cryptocurrency Users Choose and Secure
Their Wallets. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 1–17.
[35] Efpraxia Zamani, Ying He, and Matthew Phillips. 2020. On the security risks of
the blockchain. Journal of Computer Information Systems 60, 6 (2020), 495–506.

Know Your Intent: An Autonomous Multi-Perspective LLM Agent Framework for DeFi User Transaction Intent Mining
[36] Lu Zhang, Jialie Shen, Jian Zhang, Jingsong Xu, Zhibin Li, Yazhou Yao, and Litao
Yu. 2021. Multimodal marketing intent analysis for effective targeted advertising.
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 24 (2021), 1830–1843.
[37] Lejun Zhang, Xucan Zhang, Siyi Xiao, Zexin Li, Shen Su, Jing Qiu, and Zhihong
Tian. 2024. Unraveling the Deception of Web3 Phishing Scams: Dynamic Multi-
perspective Cascade Graph Approach for Ethereum Phishing Detection. IEEE
Transactions on Computational Social Systems (2024).
[38] Shun Zhang, Chaoran Yan, Jian Yang, Wei Zhang, Changyu Ren, Tongliang
Li, Jiaqi Bai, and Zhoujun Li. 2024. TiNID: A Transfer and Interpretable LLM-
Enhanced Framework for New Intent Discovery. In Joint European Conference
on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Springer, 195–212.

Qian’ang Mao, Yuxuan Zhang, Jiaman Chen, Wenjun Zhou, and Jiaqi Yan
Appendix
Token/Protocol/Scene
Function/Event
1inch
fillOrderArgs
Aave
flashLoan
Aave
stake
Aave
borrow
Aave
repay
ArbitrageExecuteStrategy
executeStrategy
Azuki
allowlistMint
bounty
fundBounty
bounty
grantArbiter
bounty
makeSubmission
Compound
delegateBySig
Compound
supply
Compound
withdraw
Curve
create
dYdX
claimRewards
ENS
delegate
ENS
delegateBySig
ERC20 CRV
approve
ERC20 CRV
revoke
ERC20 DAI
approve
ERC20 DAI
revoke
ERC20 USDT
approve
ERC20 USDT
revoke
ERC20 USDC
approve
ERC20 USDC
revoke
ERC20 WBTC
approve
ERC20 WBTC
revoke
ERC20 WETH
approve
ERC20 WETH
revoke
ERC721 BAYC
-
GnosisSafe
createProxy
GnosisSafe
execTransaction
HarvestFinance
announceStrategyUpdate
HarvestFinance
deposit
HarvestFinance
withdraw
Lido
deposit
Lido
deposit_proxy
MakerDAO
frob
MakerDAO
join
MEVBot
-
Multicall3
aggregate3
NexusMutual
buyCover
NotionalFinance
doLeveragedNToken
Pendle
swapExactSyForPt
Pendle
swapExactPtForSy
Rocket
deposit
Table 5: The DeFi token, protocol, or scene sources of trans-
actions used in our experiment, filtered by function or event
signature, where "-" means sampling any and "revoke" means
approve zero amount
Token/Protocol/Scene
Function/Event
SushiSwap
addLiquidity
SushiSwap
removeLiquidity
SushiSwap
swapExactETHForTokens
SushiSwap
swapExactTokensForETH
Swell
deposit
Uniswap
addLiquidity
Uniswap
claim
Uniswap
delegate
Uniswap
delegateBySig
Uniswap
removeLiquidity
Uniswap
swapETHForExactTokens
YearnFinance
deposit
YearnFinance
withdraw
-
vote
-
propose
Table 6: The DeFi token, protocol, or scene sources of trans-
actions used in our experiment, filtered by function or event
signature, where "-" means sampling any and "revoke" means
approve zero amount (Cont.d)
A
Experiment Environment
All experiments are conducted on an Arch Linux server equipped
with 8 NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPUs, 2TB of memory, and dual AMD
EPYC 7763 64-core processors. TIM is developed using the Ope-
nAI SDK framework with the xAI official Grok LLM API, and the
compared LLM models use the corresponding official API and Open-
Router API (as a fallback). Baseline machine Learning models are
written in Python, utilizing PyTorch and Scikit-learn frameworks.
B
Data Collection and Preparation
Our experimental dataset comprises DeFi transaction records from
the Ethereum blockchain spanning from project inception to March
2025. The dataset encompasses transactions involving major pro-
tocols such as Uniswap, Aave, Compound, and prominent tokens
including WETH, WBTC, USDT, USDC, and DAI. We initially iden-
tified direct interactions between users and smart contracts, then
expanded our search to include transactions triggering the Transfer
event within contracts to account for token-based DeFi operations.
Through stratified random sampling, we constructed a comprehen-
sive collection of DeFi transaction hashes for experimental analysis,
as shown in Table 5.
To establish ground truth for our intent classification system, we
engaged domain experts to annotate each transaction according to
our predefined intent taxonomy. The annotation process involved
a multi-criteria assessment based on contract type, interaction pat-
tern (direct contract function calls or indirect triggering through
token transfers), transaction value, and function call parameters.
We implemented a multi-round annotation workflow with an expert
consensus validation mechanism to ensure annotation accuracy
and consistency. This rigorous process resulted in all transactions
being categorized within our predefined intent framework.

Know Your Intent: An Autonomous Multi-Perspective LLM Agent Framework for DeFi User Transaction Intent Mining
C
Baseline Feature
To ensure the fairness and scientific rigor of the experimental design,
this study draws extensively on research findings from cutting-edge
fields such as blockchain transaction fraud detection during the
feature selection process. From the feature sets commonly used
in machine learning methods, we selected the feature indicators
shown in Table 7 to describe transaction information in a more
comprehensive and domain-specific manner.
D
Annotation Process
To prove the system’s effectiveness, we chose to invite experts to
perform more annotations to cover most scenarios on-chain rather
than using the interview labels from the qualitative research data.
Although the labels are inferred by experts rather than directly
reflecting the users’ native intents, they still provide a valid and
reliable basis for evaluating the performance of classification sys-
tems that are likewise grounded in external analysis. Transaction
intent annotation is a very time-consuming and labor-intensive
task, fortunately, our research received significant support from
many industry-related organizations. Therefore, we invited experts
from the AML (Anti-Money Laundering) department of central-
ized exchanges (CEX), blockchain fund security practitioners, and
blockchain veteran users (with professions including traders, devel-
opers, and scholars), totaling 10 people, to help annotate the intents
of the 600 sampled transactions. We did not set a fixed process
for the analysis, only requiring that the intent be selected from
our previously established intent taxonomy and that online, open
tools be used to obtain information. This flexibility for experts is
good for capturing diverse approaches but might introduce vari-
ability. During the process, each transaction was annotated by two
independent annotators. The inter-annotator agreement prior to
adjudication was Cohen’s kappa = 0.7. We designated CEX AML
experts and blockchain fund security practitioners as the expert
adjudication. Ultimately, we obtained the final annotated intent
results for the 600 transaction data through the expert consensus
validation mechanism.

Qian’ang Mao, Yuxuan Zhang, Jiaman Chen, Wenjun Zhou, and Jiaqi Yan
Feature
Description
Purpose
nonce
A counter for the sending address, indicating the
number of transactions it has initiated
Useful for analyzing user behavior patterns, such as dis-
tinguishing between regular users and bots (e.g., MEV
bots)
transactionIndex
The index of the transaction within the block,
representing its order in the block
Helps analyze priority transactions during congestion
and understand how miners select transactions
blockNumber
The height of the block containing the transaction,
indicating its chronological order
Used to study the temporal distribution of transactions,
detect market trends, and identify trading patterns
value
The transaction amount, measured in wei (the
smallest Ethereum unit)
Helps identify large-value transactions, analyze whale
behavior, and detect market manipulation
gas
The actual amount of gas consumed during the
transaction execution
Used to evaluate transaction costs, study gas price dy-
namics, and optimize smart contract performance
gasPrice
The gas price per unit set at the time of transac-
tion submission, measured in wei
Useful for studying transaction fee fluctuations, gas
auction mechanisms, and priority fee strategies
inputLength
The byte length of the transaction input data, usu-
ally for contract calls or data storage
Helps analyze interaction patterns with smart contracts
and detect abnormal contract invocation behavior
logLength
The number of event logs generated in the trans-
action receipt
Used to study DeFi transaction patterns such as DEX
trading, liquidity provision, and liquidation
traceLength
The number of execution traces generated during
the transaction process
Useful for analyzing complex transaction paths such as
flash loans, arbitrage, and cross-chain operations
Table 7: Transaction Features Used in Supervised Machine Learning Methods
