Minimalist machine-learned interatomic potentials can predict complex structural
behaviors accurately
I˜nigo Robredo-Magro,1 Binayak Mukherjee,1 Hugo Aramberri,1 and Jorge ´I˜niguez-Gonz´alez1,2
1Smart Materials Unit, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST),
Avenue des Hauts-Fourneaux 5, L-4362 Esch/Alzette, Luxembourg
2Department of Physics and Materials Science, University of Luxembourg, Rue du Brill 41, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg
The past decade has witnessed a spectacular development of machine-learned interatomic po-
tentials (MLIPs), to the extent that they are already the approach of choice for most atomistic
simulation studies not requiring an explicit treatment of electrons. Typical MLIP usage guidelines
emphasize the need for exhaustive training sets and warn against applying the models to situations
not considered in the corresponding training space. This restricts the scope of MLIPs to interpola-
tive calculations, essentially denying the possibility of using them to discover new phenomena in a
serendipitous way. While there are reasons to be cautious, here we adopt a more sanguine view and
challenge the predictive power of two representative and widely available MLIP approaches. We
work with minimalist training sets that rely on little prior knowledge of the investigated materials.
We show that the resulting models – for which we adopt modest/default choices of the defining
hyperparameters – are very successful in predicting non-trivial structural effects (competing poly-
morphs, energy barriers for structural transformations, occurrence of non-trivial topologies) in a way
that is qualitatively and quasi-quantitatively correct. Our results thus suggest an expanded scope
of modern MLIP approaches, evidencing that somewhat trivial – and easy to compute – models can
be an effective tool for the discovery of novel and complex physical phenomena.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Machine-learned force fields or interatomic potentials
(MLFFs or MLIPs) have become an efficient tool for
first-principles atomistic modeling.1–8 When trained on
quantum-mechanical data, they can achieve near-first-
principles accuracy at a small fraction of the cost. Most
current applications of MLIPs rely on large, carefully se-
lected training sets and optimized hyperparameters, with
the aim of ensuring that the model interpolates within
its training domain. This strategy minimizes errors and
yields very accurate potentials. It also seems to imply
that the scope of MLIPs is confined to regions of the
configuration space explored in the training set.
Ferroelectric materials exhibit highly non-trivial struc-
tural and lattice-dynamical behavior driven by com-
peting instabilities and strong anharmonic effects.9–12
Their phase diagrams often include multiple polymorphs
with quasi-degenerate free energies, intricate transforma-
tion paths between phases, and complex topological fea-
tures.
Further, their properties are highly sensitive to
electric and elastic boundary conditions, size, tempera-
ture, and external fields.
First-principles methods, as
those based on Density Functional Theory (DFT),13–15
can predict and explain such effects with high accuracy,
but their computational cost limits their use in large-
scale or long-time simulations.
Successful partial so-
lutions to this problem have been developed over the
years, notably through the so-called “second-principles”
methods16–19 and other first-principles-based effective
potential approaches.20–29 Yet, such schemes lack gen-
erality, which limits the span of materials and effects
investigated.
For example: novel fluorite ferroelectrics
such as hafnia, characterized by an intimate connection
between ferroelectric switching and ionic mobility, are all
but impossible to treat within the traditional effective
schemes. Modern MLIPs are expected to drastically im-
prove this situation and become the approach of choice
for simulations of ferroelectric and related phenomena.
Symbiotically, ferroelectrics offer a stringent playground
for testing the performance of modern ML approaches.
In this context, it is relevant to note that rela-
tively simple second-principles potentials and effective
Hamiltonians have been remarkably successful in pre-
dicting behaviors beyond the scope of the DFT data
used to compute the model parameters.
Notable ex-
amples include complex composition-driven phase tran-
sitions (as in the so-called “morphotropic phase bound-
ary” of PbZr1−xTixO3 solid solutions24) or the oc-
currence of topological skyrmion-like quasiparticles in
nanoferroelectrics.30–34 These and other striking discov-
eries – eventually confirmed experimentally – emerged
serendipitously from the simulations. Can MLIPs deliver
similarly unforeseen predictions, or are these the patri-
mony of relatively simple models that can be expected
to yield meaningful results beyond their training space?
This is a relevant question to define the application scope
of MLIPs and to what extend resorting to simpler poten-
tials may still be required in exploratory studies.
In this work we test the predictive performance of
MLIPs for challenging ferroelectricity-related effects and
provide an answer to the above question. We adopt a
peculiar approach, whereby we pretend we know little
about the materials at the time of constructing the mod-
els; thus, we use minimalist training sets of the type one
would consider by default as a first step in the investi-
gation of an all-new compound. Then, we test whether
the MLIPs thus constructed are able to predict the non-
trivial structural properties that we know these com-
pounds display.
arXiv:2511.17449v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  21 Nov 2025

2
Specifically, we work with two widely available and
representative MLIP types: the kernel-based Gaussian
Approximation Potentials1 (GAPs) implemented in the
Vienna ab initio software package3,35,36 (VASP) and
the equivariant deep learning potentials provided in
Allegro.5,37,38 In both cases we adopt modest or default
(when available) choices for the hyperparameters defining
the MLIPs, which are supposed to strike a balance be-
tween accuracy and computational burden in the descrip-
tion of generic compounds. Also, we use the Bayesian
“on-the-fly” approach implemented in VASP to derive
training sets,3 using material-unspecific control param-
eters and starting the procedure from the experimen-
tally well-known structural phases of the respective com-
pounds. Following this minimalist spirit, we generate our
training sets using small periodically-repeated supercells
containing 40 atoms at most.
We apply this MLIP-construction approach to four
representative
ferroelectric
and
related
compounds,
namely BaTiO3, BiFeO3, PbZrO3, and HfO2. We find
that our basic models successfully reproduce a variety
of non-trivial behaviors, such as the vortex-antivortex
electric-dipole lattice recently observed in BaTiO3 moir´e
bilayers,39 the non-trivial polarization switching path
(and its corresponding energy barrier) in BiFeO3,40
the competition of polar and antipolar polymorphs in
PbZrO3,41,42 and the occurrence of a ferroelectric poly-
morph in HfO2.43 In all cases we find that the models
predict the examined properties in a qualitatively correct
way. Furthermore, our quantitative results – including
tiny energy differences between competing polymorphs
and polarization-switching energy barriers – turn out to
be incredibly accurate in most cases.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II
we describe the construction of our minimalist MLIPs.
In Section III we present the obtained models and how
well they perform as regards both interpolating within
the training set and extrapolating to unexplored space.
In Section IV we further discuss the implications of this
study. Finally, in Section V we summarize our main find-
ings and conclusions.
II.
MINIMALIST MODELS
The guiding principle of our modeling approach is sim-
plicity and minimal prior knowledge. For all models con-
sidered in this work, we deliberately adopt a low-effort
protocol: training sets are kept small are left at their
default values; no optimization or manual tuning is per-
formed at any stage.
This strategy allows us to eval-
uate the intrinsic predictive capacity of modern MLIP
frameworks under the most basic by-default fool-proof
conditions. Our aim is not to benchmark best-case per-
formance, but rather to assess how well these models can
generalize when trained in a straightforward, out-of-the-
box manner.
A.
Kernel-based GAP interatomic potentials
We first consider a kernel-based interatomic poten-
tial trained using the Bayesian on-the-fly framework im-
plemented in VASP.1,3 This method is rooted in kernel
ridge regression, using Smooth Overlap of Atomic Po-
sitions (SOAP) descriptors44 to represent local atomic
environments and build GAPs that mimic DFT accu-
racy. Training data is gathered during relatively short
first-principles molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of
the studied systems.3 We train starting from well-known
polymorphs of each of the compounds, running for 10000
steps of 2 fs, with a linear temperature ramp from 10 K
to 300 K.
We set the model parameters to the default values of
VASP: the cut-off radius for the radial descriptor is 8 ˚A
(which roughly coincides with the lattice parameter used
for the perovskite supercells), the cut-off radius for the
angular descriptor is 5 ˚A (enough to include at least 20
nearest neighbors for each atom). The number of basis
functions used to expand the radial and angular descrip-
tors is set to 12 and 8, respectively, and the maximum an-
gular momentum of spherical harmonics is set to 6. The
threshold for error estimation is set to 0.002, with au-
tomatic updating to a value proportional to the average
errors as implemented by default. As the simulation runs,
the model learns in real time: in essence, new configu-
rations are flagged if the predicted maximum Bayesian
error is larger than a threshold, and a new first princi-
ples calculation is performed, adding it to the dataset.
In the following, we refer to these models generically as
“VASP MLIPs”.
B.
E(3)-equivariant neural networks
We also constructed potentials based on the Allegro
neural network architecture,5,37,38 trained using the very
same dataset generated by the VASP on-the-fly proce-
dure. Allegro is based on the same symmetry principles
as the better-known NequIP scheme – specifically, E(3)-
equivariance – but differs in how it processes atomic envi-
ronments. Instead of relying on message passing between
atoms, Allegro builds local representations directly from
the fixed neighborhood of each atom, using a sequence of
tensor products to capture many-body interactions. This
design avoids the iterative communication steps typical
of message-passing networks, leading to improved scala-
bility and faster evaluation, particularly in large systems.
We make a reasonable choice of Allegro hyperparam-
eters based on the documentation provided by the de-
velopers, with no effort to tune them. We set the radial
cut-off to the same value as for the VASP MLIPs, 8 ˚A. For
the rest of the parameters, we take them as in the appli-
cation example proposed with Allegro. We use 2 tensor
layers with full O(3) symmetry, polynomial cut-off of 6,
and embed feature multiplicity of 64. We set the maxi-
mum order of spherical harmonics embedding to 3, which

3
6
8
10
R distortions (º)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Counts
RX
RY
RZ
2
0
2
M distortions (º)
MX
MY
MZ
0.4
0.6
Polarization (C/m²)
PX
PY
PZ
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Intensity (arb. units)
2θ (degrees)
cubic
tetragonal
oIII
monoclinic
time
FIG. 1.
Configuration space explored in the training of
BiFeO3 and HfO2. The top panels show histograms for the
main perovskite distortions: antiphase (R) and in-phase (M)
octahedral tilts, as well as the polarization (P).
The his-
tograms are derived from the MD trajectories correspond-
ing to the on-the-fly training starting from the ferroelectric
ground state (R3c polymorphs); they show that the mate-
rial fluctuates around the ground state configuration, charac-
terized by Rx = Ry = Rz ̸= 0, Px = Py = Pz ̸= 0, and
Mx = My = Mz = 0 (values indicated by dashed black
lines).
The bottom panel shows simulated diffraction pat-
terns for configurations visited during the HfO2 training, cor-
responding to the MD run that started from the tetragonal
polymorph. By comparison with reference data (colored) for
important HfO2 phases, we can appreciate that the mate-
rial evolved spontaneously toward low-symmetry polymorphs
during the MD run, visiting the oIII ferroelectric phase in
particular.
is the recommended value for more accurate MLIPs while
being slower. We train on energies, forces, and stresses,
with a relative error factor of 1:100:100. We split training
and validation sets in a ratio of 9:1 (common ratio) and
use a batch size of 1. We start with a learning rate (LR)
of 10−3 and use a LR scheduler that reduces it by half
on plateaus with a patience of 50 epochs, stopping the
training when the LR is smaller than 10−5. In the fol-
lowing, we refer to these models generically as “Allegro
MLIPs”.
C.
On-the-fly training sets
In this minimalist approach we limit the number of
training runs.
Specifically, for BaTiO3 we only train
once, starting from the ferroelectric R3m ground state of
the material. For both BiFeO3 and PbZrO3, we train first
starting from the R3c ferroelectric polymorph (which
is the ground state for BiFeO3), and then we expand
the training set via a second MD run starting from the
Pnma non-polar polymorph.41,45 Finally, for HfO2 we
train first starting from the P21/c non-polar monoclinic
ground state, to then extend the training set with a sec-
ond MD run starting from another non-polar polymorph
with tetragonal symmetry P42/nmc. For the perovskites
(BaTiO3, BiFeO3, and PbZrO3) we always train using a
40-atom supercell that can be viewed as a 2 × 2 × 2 mul-
tiple of the elemental 5-atom perovskite cell. Note that,
in particular, this implies that the training for PbZrO3
never explores the lowest-energy antiferroelectric and fer-
rielectric polymorphs of the material.42 For HfO2, we
train using a 24-atom that can be seen as obtained from
the primitive cell of the tetragonal polymorph by apply-
ing a transformation that doubles the volume while keep-
ing the cell as isotropic as possible.
In Fig. 1 we illustrate two methods to track the ex-
plored space during the training. For perovskites, since
we are training in the 40-atom unit cell, we can extract
the amplitude of the main distortions that characterize
the structures, namely the polarization (P) and the in-
phase (M) and antiphase (R) tilts of the O6 octahedra.
In the top panels of Fig. 1 we show the histogram of
occurrences of these distortion along the training trajec-
tory for BiFeO3 starting from the R3c phase. We can see
thermal activation makes the system fluctuate around the
ground state. For HfO2, the structural complexity makes
it all but impossible to work with a reduced number of
key distortions. Instead, as shown in the bottom panel
of Fig. 1, we compute the powder diffraction spectrum
(using the visualization software VESTA46) of snapshots
taken from the training MD trajectory and compare them
to the result for well-known polymorphs, namely non-
polar cubic, tetragonal, and monoclinic as well as the
polar orthorhombic phase (oIII). This MD trajectory cor-
responds to the second stage of our HfO2 training, which
starts from the tetragonal phase with no diffraction peaks
present below 30 degrees. However, midway through the
training, low-angle peaks appear at around 18 and 25 de-
grees. These peaks can correspond to either the oIII or
the monoclinic phase – however, the characteristic mon-
oclinic peak below 30 degrees is missing, confirming the
spontaneous occurrence of the oIII phase in the MD tra-
jectory.
The training sets thus generated contain the follow-
ing number of structures for which a DFT calculation
was performed: 247 for BaTiO3, 488 for BiFeO3, 1300
for PbZrO3, and 463 for HfO2. Let us stress that these
are very small numbers, as typical ML models in the
literature rely on training sets at least 10-times bigger.

4
Representative examples are the deep neural networks
recently proposed for PbZrO3 in Ref. 47 (based on over
12500 structures and a very carefully curated exploration
of the energy landscape, probably including supercells of
up to 80 atoms) or for HfO2 in Ref. 48 (96-atom super-
cell, 21500 structures). Naturally, we do not claim here
that our minimal models will be as accurate or complete
as the mentioned potentials. Yet, as we will show, it is
worth examining how useful they may be.
D.
Details of the first-principles calculations
All first-principles calculations were performed using
the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method49 as im-
plemented in VASP,35,36 with the PBEsol exchange-
correlation functional.50 We solve explicitly for 6 elec-
trons
of
O
(2s2p4),
10
of
Ba
(5s2p66s2),
12
of
Ti (3s2p64s23d2),
15 of Bi (5d106s26p3),
14 of Fe
(3p63d74s1), 14 of Pb (5d106s2p4), 12 of Zr (4s2p65s24d2)
and 10 of Hf (5p65d36s1). The plane-wave energy cutoff
was set to 500 eV in all cases. For Brillouin zone integra-
tions corresponding to the 40-atom cell in our perovskite
simulations, we use a Γ-centered 3 × 3 × 3 k-point mesh
for BaTiO3 and PbZrO3, and a 2×2×2 mesh for BiFeO3.
For HfO2, we use a grid of 3×3×3 k-points for the simu-
lations of the considered 24-atom supercell. For BiFeO3,
we add a Hubbard U correction of 4 eV for a better treat-
ment of iron’s 3d electrons.51
III.
RESULTS
We now present our minimalist MLIPs and test their
performance. We start by considering how well the mod-
els describe configurations that appear during the first-
principles MD runs used to derive the corresponding
training sets.
We thus examine the models’ ability to
interpolate between structures typical of the explored
space, where they are expected to perform very well.
Then, we run extrapolation tests designed to push the
models outside their comfort zone. Here we look at struc-
tures and properties well beyond the training set, includ-
ing features that are critical in investigations of phase
transitions (e.g., dynamic stability of higher-symmetry
reference phases, stability and energy of additional poly-
morphs), non-linear responses to external fields (switch-
ing paths and energy barriers), and emerging strongly
inhomogeneous orders (nanoscale topological textures).
These tests allow us to gauge to what extent the models
can generalize and still produce physically meaningful re-
sults, even when applied in regimes they were not trained
for.
A.
Interpolation tests
To quantify our models’ accuracy at interpolating in-
side the training space, we proceed as follows. From each
of the MD simulations used to generate training sets on
the fly, we extract 1% of the visited structures, equis-
paced.
For each such structure we run a single-point
DFT calculation to compute energy, forces, and stresses.
We run the same calculations using the corresponding
MLIPs and compare their predictions to the DFT re-
sults. The histograms of the differences between MLIP
predictions and DFT results are shown in Fig. 2.
We find that, across all systems, both our VASP and
Allegro models show relatively narrow error distribu-
tions, which implies that the MLIPs perform well repro-
ducing DFT results. Most of the predictions fall within
±5 meV per formula unit (f.u.) for energy, ±50 meV/˚A
for force components, and ±3 kBar for stress compo-
nents. Both models show a broader and noisier error dis-
tribution for the energies, suggesting that they are harder
to learn. This could be due to the relatively small number
of energy data points (1 per configuration in the train-
ing set) as compared to forces (tens per configuration)
or stresses (6 per configuration). Among the considered
materials, the models for HfO2 seem the most accurate.
Overall, while both approaches work well to reproduce
our minimal datasets, Allegro seems to offer a small edge
in accuracy within the explored configuration space.
B.
Extrapolation tests
We perform two kinds of extrapolation tests.
First,
for all the materials we compute the phonons of a high-
symmetry phase that appears as the natural reference
from which all the low-energy structures of interest can
be obtained through appropriate distortions. This ref-
erence phase is the ideal cubic perovskite structure for
BaTiO3, BiFeO3, and PbZrO3, and the ideal cubic fluo-
rite structure for HfO2. Note that the phonons of such
reference structures provide a guide to the symmetry-
and energy-lowering distortions of the materials, and are
thus critical in the study of phase transitions. (The physi-
cal relevance of the cubic fluorite structure to ferroelectric
HfO2 is currently debated,52 but considering the phonons
of this phase still serves our current testing purposes.)
Second, we perform a battery of material-specific tests.
For BaTiO3 we examine the vortex-antivortex electric
dipole texture recently reported in Ref. 39, one of the
foundational results of the field of moir´e multilayers
based on perovskite-oxide membranes. For BiFeO3 we
examine the non-trivial structural transition path asso-
ciated to the reversal of one polarization component, key
to the magnetoelectric switching properties (i.e., elec-
tric control of the magnetization) in this material.40,53
For PbZrO3 we inspect the relative stability of low-
lying polymorphs of diverse electric character (antiferro,
ferro, ferri), critical to the phase transitions and antifer-

5
BaTiO3
BiFeO3
PbZrO3
HfO2
VASP MLIP
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
-10
-5
0
5
10
-10
-5
0
5
10
Allegro MLIP
-10
-5
0
5
10
-10
-5
0
5
10
-10
-5
0
5
10
-10
-5
0
5
10
Frequency
Frequency
Energy (meV/fu)
Force (10meV/Å)
Stress (kBar)
FIG. 2.
Histograms for the errors made by our minimalist MLIPs in reproducing the DFT energies, forces, and stresses
corresponding to structures typical of the explored configuration space (see text). Each distribution is normalized to 1. We use
different bin sizes for clarity.
roelectric response of this compound in bulk and thin-
film forms.42,54 Finally, for HfO2 we examine the exis-
tence and relative stability of the ferroelectric polymorph
that has brought massive interest to this compound, in-
cluding some of its well-known distinctive features (e.g.,
the existence of domain walls with a negative formation
energy).43,52,55,56
1.
Reference-phase phonon bands
We compute the phonons of the cubic phase of each
material using DFT and the corresponding MLIP, and
compare the results in Fig. 3.
(We employ the pack-
age phonopy57 to compute phonons, using the finite-
differences approach in a 2×2×2 supercell. For the sake
of a more direct comparison, we omit non-analytical cor-
rections in these calculations.) Overall, our minimalist
MLIPs capture the main features of the phonon spectra
remarkably well, reproducing exactly the DFT results
for most bands.
Notably, all MLIPs correctly predict
the main structural instabilities. In BaTiO3, for exam-
ple, the models capture the unstable bands with imagi-
nary phonon frequencies (shown as negative frequencies
in Fig. 3, following the usual convention). The most no-
table disagreement is found for BiFeO3, where the MLIPs
do not capture a second unstable phonon at the Γ point;
this is a fine detail that does not have – as far as we can
tell – any practical consequence.
Remarkably too, our MLIPs do not seem to introduce
any unphysical features. Most critically, we find no new
unstable modes that could lead to artifacts such as false
energy minima (i.e., fake competing polymorphs) or qual-
itative errors (fake anomalies) in the response to external
fields. This strongly suggests that our minimal MLIPs
are both robust and reliable, predicting behaviors that
are physically sound even outside the explored training
space.
2.
BaTiO3: Vortex-antivortex electric texture
Bulk barium titanate is paraelectric and cubic above
393 K, approximately.58–60 Upon cooling it undergoes a
well-known sequence of phase transitions to ferroelectric
phases of different symmetry: tetragonal, orthorhombic,
and rhombohedral.
In ideal bulk-like conditions (i.e.,
electric short circuit and zero remnant stress), the polar
states tend to be homogeneous. Under specific electric
or elastic boundary conditions – e.g., as in epitaxial thin
films – BaTiO3 presents multidomain states that essen-
tially follow well-known laws such as Kittel’s61.
Recently, experiments on twisted freestanding bilay-
ers of BaTiO3 have revealed a mesmerizing and unprece-
dented type of ferroelectric multidomain configuration: a
lattice of electric vortices and antivortices that appears
at the interface between layers39, essentially as shown in
Fig. 4. Costly DFT calculations helped ascertain the ori-
gin of such dipole texture: the shear-strain modulation
induced by the moir´e interfacial potential gives rise to the
observed vortical pattern through the flexoelectric effect,
i.e., the polar response to strain gradients.62 The DFT
analysis concluded that the vortex-antivortex dipole lat-
tice lies about 9 meV/f.u. above an homogeneous state
with a net polarization along a ⟨110⟩in-plane pseudocu-
bic direction. The simulations relied on drastic simplifi-

6
BaTiO3
BiFeO3
PbZrO3
HfO2
Γ
X
M
Γ
Γ
X U|K
Γ
L
W X
R
M Γ
X
M
Γ
R
M Γ
X
M
Γ
R
M
Frequency (THz)
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
DFT
VASP MLIP
Allegro MLIP
FIG. 3. Phonon bands for high-symmetry reference phases (see text). In black, solid lines, the DFT result. In red, long dashed
lines, the VASP MLIP prediction. In green, short dashed lines the Allegro MLIP prediction.
DFT
VASP MLIP
Allegro MLIP
a)
b)
c)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position (frac. coord. unit cell)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position (frac. coord. unit cell)
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
Pz (C/m2)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position (frac. coord. unit cell)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position (frac. coord. unit cell)
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
Pz (C/m2)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position (frac. coord. unit cell)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position (frac. coord. unit cell)
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
Pz (C/m2)
FIG. 4. Vortex-antivortex electric dipole patterns mimicking experimental observations in BaTiO3 moir´e bilayers (see text).
The arrows denote in-plane local polarization components (see text), while the color map corresponds to the out-of-plane
component.
cations – e.g., a bulk-like version of the vortex-antivortex
lattice was considered, instead of the actual moir´e bilayer.
Nevertheless, the connection between polar texture and
inhomogeneous strain was clearly established, evidencing
a key role of the flexoelectric effect that was corroborated
by other authors shortly after63,64.
The mentioned vortex-antivortex lattice displays many
non-trivial features that provide a stringent test to the
predictive power of our minimalist MLIPs for BaTiO3.
Most notably, it displays strong polarization gradients
and a giant density of non-trivial ferroelectric domain
walls. Additionally, the flexoelectric connection between
polarization and strain gradients is non-trivial in itself,
as it reflects subtle electromechanical couplings, strictly
in the long wavelength limit (q →0).65 All these are
features that our simple MLIPs for BaTiO3 (trained on
DFT data obtained from small 40-atom cells) cannot
be expected to capture accurately, in principle. At the
same time, our models do contain information about the
(short-range) interatomic couplings that are expected to
dominate the energetics of domain walls in these ma-
terials.
(See the Discussion section for a comment on
long-range electrostatic couplings.) Hence, one may won-
der: is that information enough to predict, at a qualita-
tive level at least, the occurrence and main features of
the vortex-antivortex pattern of Fig. 4 as obtained from
DFT?
We tested our MLIPs by relaxing the vortex-antivortex
structures that some of us studied in Ref. 39 using
DFT. The basic results of this exercise are captured in
Fig. 4, which shows the electric dipoles extracted from
the atomic structure following the same procedure as in
Ref. 39. (In essence, we plot Ti-centered electric dipoles,
computed for each Ti cation in the lattice.) Remarkably,
both MLIPs relax to local energy minima that retain the
vortex-antivortex texture obtained in DFT and observed
experimentally. The agreement between the structures
obtained with DFT and the VASP MLIP is nearly per-
fect; the Allegro model, on the other hand, predicts cor-
rectly the magnitude of the local dipoles but fails to cap-
ture the size of the vortex and antivortex cores. A clear
connection between electric texture and local strain is
established in all cases (not shown here). Finally, the en-
ergy difference between the textured state and the com-
peting homogeneous solution with polarization in-plane
is 10 meV/f.u. and 1 meV/f.u, respectively, for the VASP
and Allegro MLIP, both remarkably close to the DFT
value of 9 meV/f.u.

7
In conclusion, our minimal MLIPs for BaTiO3 per-
form very well when applied to a problem that clearly
lies beyond the training space explored in the model con-
struction. There is no doubt that these MLIPs could have
been used to reach the basic conclusions of the DFT anal-
ysis in Ref. 39, namely, the existence of low-lying local
energy minima featuring a lattice of electric vortices and
antivortices, and the connection between such a dipole
pattern and the spatial modulation of shear strains. The
difference: a 104-fold speed up in the corresponding sim-
ulations, from weeks to minutes of CPU time.
3.
BiFeO3: Switching path
So far, BiFeO3 is the only room-temperature magne-
toelectric multiferroic material of practical importance.66
Its remanent polarization has been experimentally mea-
sured to be one of the largest among ferroelectrics, with
P ≈1 C/m2, while the typical coercive field is also
relatively large (around 200 kV/cm for bulky samples).
Room-temperature electric control of magnetization was
demonstrated in BiFeO3 already in 2014.40 To advance
toward a technological use of such a magnetoelectric
switching effect, several outstanding issues remain, in-
cluding a needed reduction in the coercive field so that
ultralow-power actuation can be achieved. A significant
research effort focuses on this goal.67,68
In this context, there is interest in studying switching
barriers and paths in BiFeO3, which can be estimated
from DFT, e.g. by using the so-called “nudged elastic
band” method.69 Critically, both the switching barrier
and the corresponding structural path need to be opti-
mized in order to achieve ultralow-power magnetoelec-
tric switching in BiFeO3.
Specifically, it is important
to work in conditions such that polarization switching is
accompanied by a reversal of the antiphase octahedral
tilts characteristic of BiFeO3’s ferroelectric phase, as the
latter control the sign of the magnetization.40,70,71
Hence, to test our BiFeO3 models, we compute the
switching path corresponding to the reversal of one po-
larization component, which captures the main features
of the effect.
Figure 5 shows the comparison between
DFT and MLIP results. The MLIPs predict almost ex-
actly the energy barrier and corresponding distortions,
including the sign reversal of the Rz component of the
antiphase O6 tilts. Bear in mind that the switching pro-
ceeds through a transition state, with Pz = Rz = 0 that
is never explored in the training (see Fig. 1). Yet, the
DFT energy barrier is reproduced within 1 meV/f.u.
4.
PbZrO3: discovering unprecedented phases
PbZrO3 may well be the inorganic perovskite with
the richest low-energy landscape.41,42,47,72 Experimen-
tally, the bulk stable phase at ambient conditions is anti-
ferroelectric (AFE40 in the following). It features oxy-
TABLE I. Comparison of DFT and MLIP energies for the four
low-energy phases of PbZrO3 considered (see text). Energies
are given in meV/f.u. The AFE40 phase is taken as the zero
of energy.
DFT
VASP MLIP
Allegro MLIP
FiE
-0.84
-2.04
-3.80
AFE80
-0.89
-4.66
-1.78
AFE40
0.00
0.00
0.00
FE
+0.23
-11.12
-13.11
Cubic
278
272
261
gen octahedral rotations, antiparallel displacements of
the Pb cations, and significantly deformed O6 groups.
A rhombohedral ferroelectric phase (FE) with R3c sym-
metry is very close in energy and generally assumed to
be the structure the material adopts upon application of
an electric field. Then, recent calculations by some of us
predicted that a ferrieletric phase (FiE), with uncompen-
sated antiparallel displacements of the Pb atoms, has a
lower energy than the AFE40 polymorph. Further, it has
been shown from first principles that the AFE40 phase
itself presents a cell-doubling instability, yielding yet an-
other low-energy structure (AFE80).42,72 Strikingly, DFT
predicts that these four phases lie within a 1 meV/f.u.
energy window42, which poses a challenge for effective
modeling.
Table I shows our results for the energies of PbZrO3’s
main competing polymorphs. (The MLIP-obtained lat-
tice parameters and atomic structures are virtually iden-
tical to the DFT results, with deviations of 1 % at most,
and are not shown here.) Most remarkably, our MLIPs
correctly predict the existence of the AFE40, AFE80, and
FiE phases. Further, these polymorphs are found to lie
within a few meV per formula unit of each other, essen-
tially capturing the near-degeneracy obtained from DFT.
Table I also shows that our minimal MLIPs are not per-
fect, though, as they exaggerate the stability of the FE
polymorph. Further, the energy gap between the cubic
perovskite structure and the low-energy polymorphs is
severely underestimated.
To see this result in its appropriate context, note that
our MLIPs for PbZrO3 are constructed based on knowl-
edge about common and simple perovskites, i.e., phases
displaying standard polar distortions and “Glazer pat-
terns” of perfect in-phase and antiphase O6 octahedral
tilts.73 Our exercise shows that such MLIPs would have
allowed us to discover exceedingly rare and non-trivial
new phases, such as the mentioned AFE40, AFE80, and
FiE structures, that are nowhere to be found in the data
used to construct the models. More specifically, our MD
simulations explore distorted low-energy configurations
that lie far – both structure and energy wise – from
the perfect cubic structure.
More critically, our mini-
mal training set is derived from DFT simulations using a
40-atom supercell that can be seen as a 2×2×2 repetition
of the elemental 5-atom perovskite unit, which is incom-

8
Rx
Ry
Rz
10
7.5
5
2.5
0
-2.5
-7.5
-5
R tilt (º)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Images
E-EGS(meV/fu)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Images
Px
Py
Pz
Pz (C/m2)
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
DFT
VASP
MLIP
Allegro
MLIP
DFT
VASP
MLIP
Allegro
MLIP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Images
DFT
VASP
MLIP
Allegro
MLIP
a)
b)
c)
FIG. 5. Ferroelectric switching path for BiFeO3 (see text). Shown are, as a function of structure along the path, the energy vs
polarization (a), polarization components (b), and antiphase tilt components (c).
TABLE II. Comparison of DFT and MLIP energies for the
key polymorphs of HfO2 considered (see text). Energies are
given in meV/f.u. The monoclinic phase is taken as the zero
of energy.
PBEsol
VASP MLIP
Allegro MLIP
monoclinic
0
0
0
tetragonal
139
140
143
oIII
64
65
67
oI
16
14
60
cubic
207
188
208
patible with any of the AFE and FiE polymorphs that
attract so much attention today.
Nevertheless: Based
on the MLIP predictions, we could then refine the mod-
els through further training on the new polymorphs, so
that, for example, the energy gap with the FE structure
in Table I be corrected.
Our PbZrO3 example thus suggests that MLIPs pro-
vide us with a platform for materials discovery studies,
starting with minimal models that can eventually be im-
proved based on the most surprising predictions coming
from the models themselves.
5.
HfO2: polymorphism and ferroelectricity
Of the ferroelectric oxides in this study, HfO2 can be
considered the odd one out.
Prior to the discovery of
its polar phase in 2011,43 HfO2 was already industrially
relevant, in use as a high-k gate dielectric in field-effect
transistors. Consequently, the observation of ferroelec-
tricity in ultrathin films immediately drew enormous in-
terest.
Several MLIP studies of HfO2 and the closely
related fluorite ZrO2 have been reported, typically based
on deep neural network potentials.48 Applications of such
MLIPs include studies of oxygen mobility,74 piezo- and
pyroelectric responses,75 or the mechanism of antiferro-
electricity in ZrO2.76
Within
our
minimalist
approach,
we
aim
at
(re)discovering the most common ferroelectric phase
of HfO2 (usually denoted “oIII”, with orthorhombic
symmetry Pca21). We also examine whether our models
predict the correct hierarchy between competing polar
and non-polar polymorphs. Our results are summarized
in Table II. (We only provide energies in this Table, as
the MLIP-predicted structures match the DFT results
to within 1% for all considered phases.) Remarkably, our
MLIPs yield a stable oIII polymorph with nearly perfect
energy as compared to the DFT result.
The excellent
accuracy in the oIII prediction can be attributed to the
fact that our MD runs find this state serendipitously
(see Section II and Fig. 1), so it is in fact included
in the training data.
More surprising is the fact that
both MLIPs reproduce correctly the ordering, energy
wise, of all the polymorphs considered. While we find
some significant quantitative deviations – as e.g.
in
the VASP-MLIP result for the cubic phase, or the
Allegro-MLIP result for the oI polymorph – those were
to be expected, as the cubic and oI states are nowhere
to be found in the training space.
It is also worth noting that an even simpler MLIP
(trained on DFT data for 12-atom cells, and comprising
only 63 DFT calculations) is already capable of predict-
ing the oIII local minimum with near-DFT accuracy in
what regards the structure and a remarkably solid value
for the energy (42 meV/f.u. above the monoclinic ground
state vs. 64 meV/f.u. from DFT). Another unique fea-
ture of oIII hafnia is that it features a negative energy of
its 180◦ferroelectric domain walls. This striking result
stems from the fact that the antipolar oI state (which can
be viewed as a ferroelectric multidomain configuration)
lies below the oIII structure, a property predicted by our
MLIPs.
IV.
DISCUSSION
Our results carry some implications – both general and
specific to ferroelectrics – that merit a brief comment.
This study provides evidence for how relatively sim-
ple models can reliably predict phenomena outside their
theoretical application scope. Hence, our results can be

9
viewed in the context of a broader theme: how increas-
ing model complexity can degrade predictive power out-
side the training range.77,78 In the future, it would be
interesting – and potentially rewarding – to explore how
recent “domain generalization” approaches perform in
materials-science problems, e.g. those involving the fam-
ily of ferroelectric materials considered here. Conversely,
it may be valuable to examine whether domain exper-
tise in ferroelectrics and related condensed-matter fields
could help define testbeds where the predictive power
of general ML schemes can be evaluated, thereby con-
tributing to the development of smarter and more effi-
cient general-purpose algorithms.
Along the same lines, our results suggest that it would
be worthwhile to conduct a more systematic investiga-
tion into how, and under what circumstances, excessive
training of ML models – such as general neural networks
– may lead to reduced predictive power outside the train-
ing space. Likewise, our findings motivate further stud-
ies on the predictive performance of MLIPs even simpler
than those considered here; for example, families of inter-
pretable potentials based on physically motivated func-
tional forms.4,6 In our view, striking the right balance
between accuracy and predictive power will be essential
for establishing practical usage guidelines for MLIPs and
developing protocols tailored to the goals of specific in-
vestigations. MLIPs offer almost unlimited flexibility in
model choice for particular applications, and making in-
formed decisions on how to proceed in each case may
increasingly become the distinctive human contribution
to this field. Achieving that will require systematic stud-
ies that build upon the somewhat anecdotal – though, in
our view, very compelling – evidence provided by works
such as the present one.
When it comes to the particular case of the ferro-
electrics investigated in this work, we should first stress
that the incredible predictions reported here are a testi-
mony to the value of the employed MLIP and on-the-fly
learning schemes,1,3,5,37,38,44 which enable the construc-
tion of incredibly useful models based on a very modest
amount of DFT simulations. This is remarkable partic-
ularly when it comes to neural network potentials, com-
monly believed to be exceedingly data hungry.
It is also worth noting that this project began as a test
of a very specific hypothesis. We believed that kernel-
based GAP-SOAP MLIPs should be able to capture the
dominant short-range interactions in ferroelectric oxides
from a modest amount of training data. In particular, we
aimed to explore the feasibility of using very small simu-
lation supercells for training. Our intuition was based on
earlier work with second-principles potentials,16,26 which
showed that DFT data from small supercells is suffi-
cient to characterize the interatomic interactions under-
lying remarkably complex structural phenomena – such
as the electric skyrmions predicted (and later experimen-
tally confirmed) in perovskite ferroelectrics.32,33,79 The
present study confirms that initial hypothesis and, more
unexpectedly, indicates that our intuition extends to cu-
rated neural-network frameworks such as Allegro.
Ul-
timately, we think this serves as an example of how a
physics-based expectation – namely, that relatively sim-
ple short-ranged couplings can produce great complexity,
yet remain easy to learn and model – can guide the iden-
tification of promising strategies for using MLIPs.
As a final note, long-range Coulomb interactions be-
tween electric dipoles are known to play a major role in
the physics of ferroelectrics, as e.g. they create depolar-
izing fields that are one of the main factors leading to
the formation of complex multidomain structures. Tra-
ditionally, effective atomistic potentials of ferroelectrics
have treated such dipole-dipole interactions exactly, us-
ing their well-known analytic form and evaluating them
via Ewald sums.16,21,80 The difficulties to include such
interactions within MLIP schemes was a blocking point
for the widespread adoption of the new models in the
ferroelectrics community.81 Nevertheless, growing evi-
dence suggest that MLIPs including mid-ranged inter-
actions (e.g., within 5 ˚A to 8 ˚A, as done here) are able
to effectively capture all relevant couplings, and that a
careful treatment of the long-range Coulomb coupling is
only needed to address very specific features (e.g., for a
correct quantitative treatment of non-analytical proper-
ties such as the longitudinal-transversal optical frequency
splitting).82–84 The present results further support this
conclusion and the usefulness of short-ranged MLIPs to
study complex ferroelectric phenomena.
V.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this work we examine the performance of machine-
learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) in predicting in-
tricate structural (and, to some extent, functional) prop-
erties of representative ferroelectric and related materi-
als. We work with standard and widely-available kernel-
based models, as well as with neural network models de-
rived from the same training sets. We restrict ourselves to
small training sets generated on-the-fly and without any
fine tuning. We also adopt modest unoptimized choices
of the MLIP-defining hyperparameters.
Then, we test
the predictive performance of the resulting minimalist
MLIPs.
Within the explored parameter space, both types of
MLIPs reproduce DFT energies, forces, and stresses with
good fidelity. More notably, the models extrapolate in
a physically meaningful way beyond the training space,
correctly predicting critical, previously unexpected prop-
erties of these compounds – from the emergence of novel
polymorphs and topological states to the occurrence of
complex polarization switching paths.
The success of
these minimalist MLIPs challenges the prevailing view
that reliable potentials necessarily require large, curated
datasets and extensive optimization. Rather, our results
show that simple, low-cost and low-knowledge training
strategies can yield models capable of unveiling unprece-
dented non-trivial behaviors. If this is true for materials

10
as complex – structurally and lattice-dynamically – as
the considered ferroelectric oxides, it is essentially guar-
anteed that our conclusions will pertain to many other
materials families as well.
Our results also suggest that complex structural prob-
lems such as those considered here could serve as valuable
testbeds for domain-generalization approaches currently
being explored in the context of general machine learning.
Our work also opens promising avenues for investigating
the use of simple MLIPs in exploratory research explic-
itly aimed at uncovering novel “out-of-scope” phenom-
ena. We thus hope that the present work will contribute
to a more informed and effective use of ML methods,
broadening their role from tools of interpolation to prac-
tical instruments for discovering and predicting emergent
physical behavior.
Fruitful
discussions
with
N.
Bristowe
(Durham)
are
gratefully
acknowledged.
Work
supported
by
the
Luxembourg
National
Research
Fundt
through
grants
BRIDGES/18421428/SWITCHON
(I.R.-M.
and
J.´I.-G.,
co-funded
by
Intel
Corporation),
IN-
TER/NSF/24/18804122/PIEZOHAFNIA
(B.M.
and
J.´I.-G.), and C23/MS/17909853/BUBBLACED (J.´I.-G.
and H.A.).
1 Albert P. Bart´ok and G´abor Cs´anyi, “Gaussian approx-
imation potentials: A brief tutorial introduction,” Inter-
national Journal of Quantum Chemistry 115, 1051–1057
(2015).
2 Han Wang, Linfeng Zhang, Jiequn Han,
and Weinan E,
“DeePMD-kit: A deep learning package for many-body
potential energy representation and molecular dynamics,”
Computer Physics Communications 228, 178–184 (2018).
3 Ryosuke Jinnouchi, Ferenc Karsai,
and Georg Kresse,
“On-the-fly machine learning force field generation: Ap-
plication to melting points,” Phys. Rev. B 100, 014105
(2019).
4 Zheyong Fan, Zezhu Zeng, Cunzhi Zhang, Yanzhou Wang,
Keke Song,
Haikuan Dong,
Yue Chen,
and Tapio
Ala-Nissila, “Neuroevolution machine learning potentials:
Combining high accuracy and low cost in atomistic simula-
tions and application to heat transport,” Physical Review
B 104, 104309 (2021).
5 Albert Musaelian, Simon Batzner, Anders Johansson,
Lixin Sun, Cameron J. Owen, Mordechai Kornbluth, and
Boris Kozinsky, “Learning local equivariant representa-
tions for large-scale atomistic dynamics,” Nature Commu-
nications 14, 579 (2023).
6 Stephen R. Xie, Matthias Rupp, and Richard G. Hennig,
“Ultra-fast interpretable machine-learning potentials,” npj
Computational Materials 9, 162 (2023).
7 Ilyes Batatia, Philipp Benner, Yuan Chiang, Alin M.
Elena, D´avid P. Kov´acs, Janosh Riebesell, Xavier R. Ad-
vincula, Mark Asta, Matthew Avaylon, William J. Bald-
win, Fabian Berger, Noam Bernstein, Arghya Bhowmik,
Samuel M. Blau, Vlad C˘arare, James P. Darby, Sandip
De,
Flaviano Della Pia,
Volker L. Deringer,
Rokas
Elijoˇsius, Zakariya El-Machachi, Fabio Falcioni, Edvin
Fako, Andrea C. Ferrari, Annalena Genreith-Schriever,
Janine George, Rhys E. A. Goodall, Clare P. Grey,
Petr Grigorev, Shuang Han, Will Handley, Hendrik H.
Heenen, Kersti Hermansson, Christian Holm, Jad Jaa-
far, Stephan Hofmann, Konstantin S. Jakob, Hyunwook
Jung, Venkat Kapil, Aaron D. Kaplan, Nima Karimi-
tari, James R. Kermode, Namu Kroupa, Jolla Kullgren,
Matthew C. Kuner, Domantas Kuryla, Guoda Liepuo-
niute, Johannes T. Margraf, Ioan-Bogdan Magd˘au, An-
gelos Michaelides, J. Harry Moore, Aakash A. Naik,
Samuel P. Niblett, Sam Walton Norwood, Niamh O’Neill,
Christoph Ortner, Kristin A. Persson, Karsten Reuter,
Andrew S. Rosen, Lars L. Schaaf, Christoph Schran,
Benjamin X. Shi, Eric Sivonxay, Tam´as K. Stenczel,
Viktor Svahn, Christopher Sutton, Thomas D. Swin-
burne, Jules Tilly, Cas van der Oord, Eszter Varga-
Umbrich, Tejs Vegge, Martin Vondr´ak, Yangshuai Wang,
William C. Witt,
Fabian Zills,
and G´abor Cs´anyi,
“A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry,”
arXiv.2401.00096 (2024), 10.48550/arXiv.2401.00096.
8 Ryan Jacobs, Dane Morgan, Siamak Attarian, Jun Meng,
Chen Shen, Zhenghao Wu, Clare Yijia Xie, Julia H.
Yang, Nongnuch Artrith, Ben Blaiszik, Gerbrand Ceder,
Kamal Choudhary, Gabor Csanyi, Ekin Dogus Cubuk,
Bowen Deng, Ralf Drautz, Xiang Fu, Jonathan God-
win, Vasant Honavar, Olexandr Isayev, Anders Johansson,
Boris Kozinsky, Stefano Martiniani, Shyue Ping Ong, Igor
Poltavsky, KJ Schmidt, So Takamoto, Aidan P. Thompson,
Julia Westermayr,
and Brandon M. Wood, “A practical
guide to machine learning interatomic potentials – Status
and future,” Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials
Science 35, 101214 (2025).
9 Karin M. Rabe, Charles H. Ahn, and Jean-Marc Triscone,
eds., Physics of Ferroelectrics:
A Modern Perspective
(Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007).
10 Dennis Meier, Jan Seidel, Marty Gregg, and Ramamoor-
thy Ramesh, Domain Walls: From Fundamental Proper-
ties to Nanotechnology Concepts (Oxford University Press,
2020).
11 Javier Junquera, Yousra Nahas, Sergei Prokhorenko, Lau-
rent Bellaiche, Jorge ´I˜niguez, Darrell G. Schlom, Long-
Qing Chen, Sayeef Salahuddin, David A. Muller, Lane W.
Martin, and R. Ramesh, “Topological phases in polar ox-
ide nanostructures,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 025001 (2023).
12 Uwe Schroeder, Cheol Seong Hwang,
and Hiroshi Fu-
nakubo, eds., Ferroelectricity in doped hafnium oxide: ma-
terials, properties and devices, 2nd ed. (Woodhead Pub-
lishing, 2025).
13 P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, “Inhomogeneous electron
gas,” Physical Review 136, B864 (1964).
14 W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, “Self-consistent equations in-
cluding exchange and correlation effects,” Physical Review
140, A1133 (1965).
15 R. M. Martin, Electronic Structure:
Basic Theory and
Practical Methods (Cambridge University Press, 2004).
16 Jacek C Wojde l, Patrick Hermet, Mathias P Ljungberg,
Philippe Ghosez,
and Jorge ´I˜niguez, “First-principles
model potentials for lattice-dynamical studies:
general
methodology and example of application to ferroic per-

11
ovskite oxides,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 25,
305401 (2013).
17 Carlos Escorihuela-Sayalero, Jacek C. Wojde l, and Jorge
´I˜niguez, “Efficient systematic scheme to construct second-
principles lattice dynamical models,” Phys. Rev. B 95,
094115 (2017).
18 Pablo Garc´ıa-Fern´andez, Jacek C Wojde l, Jorge ´I˜niguez,
and Javier Junquera, “Second-principles method for mate-
rials simulations including electron and lattice degrees of
freedom,” Physical Review B 93, 195137 (2016).
19 Nayara
Carral-Sainz,
Toraya
Fern´andez-Ruiz,
Jorge
´I˜niguez-Gonz´alez, Javier Junquera,
and Pablo Garc´ıa-
Fern´andez, “Systematic generation of electron models
for second-principles density functional theory methods,”
Physical Review B 112, 155146 (2025).
20 W. Zhong, David Vanderbilt,
and K. M. Rabe, “Phase
transitions in BaTiO3 from first principles,” Physical Re-
view Letters 73, 1861 (1994).
21 W. Zhong, David Vanderbilt,
and K. M. Rabe, “First-
principles theory of ferroelectric phase transitions for per-
ovskites: The case of BaTiO3,” Physical Review B 52,
6301 (1995).
22 U. V. Waghmare and K. M. Rabe, “Ab initio statistical
mechanics of the ferroelectric phase transition in PbTiO3,”
Physical Review B 55, 6161 (1997).
23 Henry Krakauer, Rici Yu, Cheng-Zhang Wang, Karin M
Rabe, and Umesh V. Waghmare, “Dynamic local distor-
tions in KNbO3,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
11, 3779–3787 (1999).
24 L. Bellaiche, Alberto Garc´ıa,
and David Vanderbilt,
“Finite-temperature properties of Pb(Zr1−xTix)O3 alloys
from first principles,” Physical Review Letters 84, 5427
(2000).
25 Sergey Prosandeev, Dawei Wang, Wei Ren, Jorge ´I˜niguez,
and Laurent Bellaiche, “Novel nanoscale twinned phases
in perovskite oxides,” Advanced Functional Materials 23,
234–240 (2013).
26 Pavlo Zubko,
Jacek C Wojde l,
Marios Hadjimichael,
St´ephanie Fernandez-Pena, Ana¨ıs Sen´e, Igor Luk’yanchuk,
Jean-Marc Triscone, and Jorge ´I˜niguez, “Negative capac-
itance in multidomain ferroelectric superlattices,” Nature
534, 524–528 (2016).
27 Ian David Brown, “Recent developments in the methods
and applications of the bond valence model,” Chem. Rev.
109, 6858–6919 (2009).
28 Young-Han Shin, Valentino R. Cooper, Ilya Grinberg,
and Andrew M. Rappe, “Development of a bond-valence
molecular-dynamics model for complex oxides,” Physical
Review B 71, 054104 (2005).
29 S. Tinte, M.G. Stachiotti, M. Sepliarsky, R.L. Migoni, and
C.O. Rodriguez, “Atomistic modelling of BaTiO3 based
on first-principles calculations,” Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter 11, 9679 (1999).
30 Ivan I. Naumov, L. Bellaiche, and Huaxiang Fu, “Unusual
phase transitions in ferroelectric nanodisks and nanorods,”
Nature 432, 737–740 (2004).
31 Y. Nahas, S. Prokhorenko, Lydie Louis, Z. Gui, Igor Ko-
rnev,
and L. Bellaiche, “Discovery of stable skyrmionic
state in ferroelectric nanocomposites,” Nature Communi-
cations 6, 8542 (2015).
32 M. A. Pereira Gon¸calves, Carlos Escorihuela-Sayalero,
Pablo Garc´ıa-Fern´andez, Javier Junquera,
and Jorge
´I˜niguez, “Theoretical guidelines to create and tune electric
skyrmion bubbles,” Science Advances 5, eaau7023 (2019).
33 S. Das, Y. L. Tang, Z. Hong, M.A.P. Gon¸calves, M.R.
McCarter,
C. Klewe,
K.X. Nguyen,
F. G´omez-Ortiz,
P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, V.A. Stoica, S.-L. Hsu, B. Wang,
C. Ophus, J.F. Liu, C.T. Nelson, S. Saremi, B. Prasad,
A.B. Mei, D.G. Schlom, J. ´I˜niguez, P. Garc´ıa-Fern´andez,
D.A. Muller, L.Q. Chen, J. Junquera, Martin L.W.,
and R. Ramesh, “Observation of room-temperature polar
skyrmions,” Nature 568, 368–372 (2019).
34 Hugo Aramberri and Jorge ´I˜niguez-Gonz´alez, “Brown-
ian electric bubble quasiparticles,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 132,
136801 (2024).
35 G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, “Efficient iterative schemes
for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set,” Physical Review B 54, 11169–11186 (1996).
36 G. Kresse and D. Joubert, “From ultrasoft pseudopoten-
tials to the projector augmented-wave method,” Physical
Review B 59, 1758–1775 (1999).
37 Chuin Wei Tan, Marc L. Descoteaux, Mit Kotak, Gabriel
de Miranda Nascimento, Se´an R. Kavanagh, Laura Zichi,
Menghang Wang, Aadit Saluja, Yizhong R. Hu, Tess
Smidt, Anders Johansson, William C. Witt, Boris Kozin-
sky,
and Albert Musaelian, “High-performance training
and inference for deep equivariant interatomic potentials,”
(2025).
38 Simon Batzner,
Albert Musaelian,
Lixin Sun,
Mario
Geiger, Jonathan P. Mailoa, Mordechai Kornbluth, Nicola
Molinari, Tess E. Smidt,
and Boris Kozinsky, “E(3)-
equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and
accurate interatomic potentials,” Nature Communications
13, 2453 (2022).
39 G. S´anchez-Santolino, V. Rouco, S. Puebla, H. Aram-
berri, V. Zamora, M. Cabero, F. A. Cuellar, C. Munuera,
F. Mompean,
M. Garcia-Hernandez,
A.
Castellanos-
Gomez, J. ´I˜niguez, C. Leon,
and J. Santamaria, “A 2d
ferroelectric vortex pattern in twisted BaTiO3 freestand-
ing layers,” Nature 626, 529–534 (2024).
40 J.T. Heron, J. L. Bosse, Q. He, Y. Gao, M. Trassin,
L. Ye, J. D. Clarkson, C. Wang, Jian Liu, S. Salahud-
din, D. C. Ralph, D. G. Schlom, J. ´I˜niguez, Huey,
and
R. Ramesh, “Deterministic switching of ferromagnetism
at room temperature using an electric field,” Nature 516,
pages 370–373 (2014).
41 Jorge ´I˜niguez, Massimiliano Stengel, Sergey Prosandeev,
and L. Bellaiche, “First-principles study of the multimode
antiferroelectric transition in PbZrO3,” Phys. Rev. B 90,
220103 (2014).
42 Hugo Aramberri, Claudio Cazorla, Massimiliano Stengel,
and Jorge ´I˜niguez, “On the possibility that PbZrO3 not
be antiferroelectric,” npj Computational Materials 7, 196
(2021).
43 T. S. B¨oscke, J. M¨uller, D. Br¨auhaus, U. Schr¨oder,
and
U. B¨ottger, “Ferroelectricity in hafnium oxide thin films,”
Applied Physics Letters 99, 102903 (2011).
44 Albert P. Bart´ok, Risi Kondor,
and G´abor Cs´anyi, “On
representing chemical environments,” Phys. Rev. B 87,
184115 (2013).
45 Oswaldo Di´eguez, O. E. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, Jacek C. Wo-
jde l,
and Jorge ´I˜niguez, “First-principles predictions of
low-energy phases of multiferroic BiFeO3,” Physical Re-
view B 83, 094105 (2011).
46 Koichi Momma and Fujio Izumi, “VESTA3 for three-
dimensional visualization of crystal, volumetric and mor-

12
phology data,” Journal of Applied Crystallography 44,
1272–1276 (2011).
47 Huazhang Zhang, Hao-Cheng Thong, Louis Bastogne,
Churen Gui, Xu He,
and Philippe Ghosez, “Finite-
temperature properties of the antiferroelectric perovskite
pbzro3 from a deep-learning interatomic potential,” Phys.
Rev. B 110, 054109 (2024).
48 Jing Wu, Yuzhi Zhang, Linfeng Zhang, and Shi Liu, “Deep
learning of accurate force field of ferroelectric HfO2,” Phys.
Rev. B 103, 024108 (2021).
49 P. E. Bl¨ochl, “Projector augmented-wave method,” Phys-
ical Review B 50, 17953–17979 (1994).
50 John P. Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof,
“Generalized gradient approximation made simple,” Phys-
ical Review Letters 77, 3865 (1996).
51 S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. J.
Humphreys,
and A. P. Sutton, “Electron-energy-loss
spectra and the structural stability of nickel oxide: An
LSDA+U study,” Physical Review B 57, 1505–1509
(1998).
52 Hugo Aramberri and Jorge ´I˜niguez, “Theoretical approach
to ferroelectricity in hafnia and related materials,” Com-
munications Materials 4, 95 (2023).
53 Natalya S. Fedorova, Dmitri E. Nikonov, John M. Man-
geri, Hai Li, Ian A. Young,
and Jorge ´I˜niguez, “Under-
standing magnetoelectric switching in BiFeO3 thin films,”
Phys. Rev. B 109, 085116 (2024).
54 Krina Parmar, Pauline Dufour, Emma Texier, C´ecile
Carr´et´ero,
Xiaoyan Li,
Florian Godel,
Jirka Hlinka,
Brahim Dkhil, Daniel Sando, Hugo Aramberri, Jorge
´I˜niguez-Gonz´alez,
St´ephane
Fusil,
Alexandre
Gloter,
Thomas Maroutian,
and Vincent Garcia, “Establish-
ing a pure antiferroelectric PbZrO3 phase through ten-
sile epitaxial strain,” Nature Communications 16 (2025),
10.1038/s41467-025-61867-y.
55 Hyun-Jae Lee, Minseong Lee, Kyoungjun Lee, Jinhyeong
Jo, Hyemi Yang, Yungyeom Kim, Seung Chul Chae,
Umesh Waghmare,
and Jun Hee Lee, “Scale-free ferro-
electricity induced by flat phonon bands in HfO2,” Science
369, 1343–1347 (2020).
56 Luis Azevedo Antunes,
Richard Ganser,
Christopher
Kuenneth,
and Alfred Kersch, “Characteristics of low-
energy phases of hafnia and zirconia from density func-
tional theory calculations,” Physica Status Solidi (RRL) –
Rapid Research Letters 16, 2100636 (2022).
57 A Togo and I Tanaka, “First principles phonon calculations
in materials science,” Scr. Mater. 108, 1–5 (2015).
58 Walter J. Merz, “The dielectric behavior of BaTiO3 single-
domain crystals,” Phys. Rev. 75, 687–687 (1949).
59 Walter J. Merz, “The electric and optical behavior of
BaTiO3 single-domain crystals,” Phys. Rev. 76, 1221–1225
(1949).
60 M. E. Lines and A. M. Glass, Principles and Applica-
tions of Ferroelectrics and Related Materials, Oxford Clas-
sic Texts in the Physical Sciences (Clarendon Press, Ox-
ford, 1977).
61 Charles Kittel, “Theory of the structure of ferromagnetic
domains in films and small particles,” Phys. Rev. 70, 965–
971 (1946).
62 Pavlo Zubko, Gustau Catalan, and Alexander K. Tagant-
sev, “Flexoelectric effect in solids,” Annual Review of Ma-
terials Research 43, 387–421 (2013).
63 Naafis
Ahnaf
Shahed,
Kartik
Samanta,
Mohamed
Elekhtiar, Kai Huang, Chang-Beom Eom, Mark S. Rz-
chowski, Kirill D. Belashchenko,
and Evgeny Y. Tsym-
bal, “Prediction of polarization vortices, charge modula-
tion, flat bands, and moir´e magnetism in twisted oxide
bilayers,” Phys. Rev. B 111, 195420 (2025).
64 Sergey Prosandeev, Charles Paillard,
and L. Bellaiche,
“Understanding and controlling dipolar Moir´e pattern in
ferroelectric perovskite oxide nanolayers,” Phys. Rev. B
111, L180103 (2025).
65 Massimiliano
Stengel,
“Flexoelectricity
from
density-
functional perturbation theory,” Phys. Rev. B 88, 174106
(2013).
66 Gustau Catalan and James F. Scott, “Physics and appli-
cations of bismuth ferrite,” Advanced Materials 21, 2463–
2485 (2009).
67 Bhagwati Prasad, Yen-Lin Huang, Rajesh V. Chopdekar,
Zuhuang Chen, James Steffes, Sujit Das, Qian Li, Meng-
meng Yang, Chia-Ching Lin, Tanay Gosavi, Dmitri E.
Nikonov, Zi Qiang Qiu, Lane W. Martin, Bryan D Huey,
Ian Young, Jorge ´I˜niguez, Sasikanth Manipatruni,
and
Ramamoorthy Ramesh, “Ultralow voltage manipulation of
ferromagnetism,” Advanced Materials 32, 2001943 (2020).
68 Yen-Lin Huang, Dmitri Nikonov, Christopher Addiego,
Rajesh V. Chopdekar, Bhagwati Prasad, Lei Zhang, Jy-
otirmoy Chatterjee, Heng-Jui Liu, Alan Farhan, Ying-
Hao Chu, Mengmeng Yang, Maya Ramesh, Zi Qiang Qiu,
Bryan D. Huey, Chia-Ching Lin, Tanay Gosavi, Jorge
´I˜niguez, Jeffrey Bokor, Xiaoqing Pan, Ian Young, Lane W.
Martin, and Ramamoorthy Ramesh, “Manipulating mag-
netoelectric energy landscape in multiferroics,” Nature
Communications 11, 2836 (2020).
69 Daniel Sheppard, Penghao Xiao, William Chemelewski,
Duane D. Johnson, and Graeme Henkelman, “A general-
ized solid-state nudged elastic band method,” The Journal
of Chemical Physics 136, 074103 (2012).
70 Claude Ederer and Nicola A. Spaldin, “Weak ferromag-
netism and magnetoelectric coupling in bismuth ferrite,”
Physical Review B 71, 060401 (2005).
71 D. Rahmedov, Dawei Wang, Jorge ´I˜niguez,
and L. Bel-
laiche, “Magnetic cycloid of BiFeO3 from atomistic simu-
lations,” Physical Review Letters 109, 037207 (2012).
72 JS Baker,
M Pa´sciak,
JK Shenton,
P Vales-Castro,
B Xu, J Hlinka, P M´arton, RG Burkovsky, G Catalan,
AM Glazer, et al., “A re-examination of antiferroelectric
PbZrO3 and PbHfO3: an 80-atom pnam structure,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.08856 (2021).
73 A. M. Glazer, “Simple ways of determining perovskite
structures,” Acta Crystallographica Section A 31, 756–762
(1975).
74 Liyang Ma, Jing Wu, Tianyuan Zhu, Yiwei Huang, Qiyang
Lu, and Shi Liu, “Ultrahigh oxygen ion mobility in ferro-
electric hafnia,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 256801 (2023).
75 Richard Ganser, Simon Bongarz, Alexander von Mach,
Luis Azevedo Antunes,
and Alfred Kersch, “Piezo- and
pyroelectricity in zirconia: A study with machine-learned
force fields,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 18, 054066 (2022).
76 Richard Ganser, Patrick D. Lomenzo, Liam Collins, Bo-
han Xu, Luis Azevedo Antunes, Thomas Mikolajick, Uwe
Schroeder,
and Alfred Kersch, “Mechanism of antiferro-
electricity in polycrystalline ZrO2,” Advanced Functional
Materials 34, 2405513 (2024).
77 Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan
Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever, “Deep double de-

13
scent: Where bigger models and more data hurt,” (2019),
arXiv:1912.02292.
78 Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz, “In search of lost
domain generalization,” (2020), arXiv:2007.01434.
79 Jacek C Wojde l and Jorge ´I˜niguez, “Ferroelectric transi-
tions at ferroelectric domain walls found from first princi-
ples,” Physical Review Letters 112, 247603 (2014).
80 X. Gonze and C. Lee, “Dynamical matrices, born effective
charges, dielectric permittivity tensors, and interatomic
force constants from density-functional perturbation the-
ory,” Physical Review B 55, 10355 (1997).
81 Linfeng
Zhang,
Han
Wang,
Maria
Carolina
Muniz,
Athanassios Z. Panagiotopoulos,
Roberto Car,
and
Weinan E, “A deep potential model with long-range elec-
trostatic interactions,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
156, 124107 (2022).
82 Jiyuan Yang and Shi Liu, “Topological phase transitions
in perovskite superlattices driven by temperature, electric
field, and doping,” Phys. Rev. B 110, 214112 (2024).
83 Lorenzo Monacelli and Nicola Marzari, “Electrostatic in-
teractions in atomistic and machine-learned potentials for
polar materials,” (2024), arXiv:2412.01642.
84 Miao Yu, Fernando G´omez-Ortiz, Louis Bastogne, Jin-Zhu
Zhao,
and Philippe Ghosez, “Role of long-range dipolar
interactions in the simulation of the properties of polar
crystals using effective atomic potentials,” Phys. Rev. B
112, 104324 (2025).
